.\" RCSid $Id: lamptab.5,v 1.2 2021/08/21 07:04:32 greg Exp $
.TH LAMP.TAB 5 2021-08-18 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
lamp.tab \- table of lamp colors and lumen depreciation factors 
.SH DESCRIPTION
Lamp.tab contains a table of lamp data. The lines are formatted thus:
.IP
.RI / "light source name re" /
.I x y m
.PP
or 
.IP
.RI / "light source alias re" /
.RI ( "light source name" )
.PP
The first form gives the color and depreciation of a lamp whose name
matches the light source name regular expression. The second gives
an alternate name for a light source. Comments beginning with '#'
are supported.
.SS Notes
.IP \(bu
Basic regular expressions (original grep) are used with the addition
of "\\<" for beginning of word and "\\>" for end-of-word.
.IP \(bu
.I x
and
.I y
are CIE x and y coordinates. These give the color of the light.  See
.UR https://www.iso.org/standard/74165.html
ISO/CIE 11664-3:2019
.UE 
\*(lqColorimetry \(em Part 3: Cie Tristimulus Values\*(rq for
definitions.
.IP \(bu
.I m
is a "coefficient of depreciation." This is a multiplier used to
reduce the output of a lamp to the value it would have after it has
been in operation for its expected life. It is used to predict the
output of a lighting system comprised of many lamps. See the
.I IES Lighting Handbook
for more information.
.IP \(bu
Any character except '#' may be used to delimit the light source name
regular expression; '/' is conventional, but not required.
.IP \(bu
Regular expressions may contain '\\' followed by the delimiter
character; aliases may contain '\\' followed by ')'.
.IP \(bu  
Comments begin with '#' and may occur at the end of any line.
.IP \(bu
Blank lines are ignored.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward 
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ies2rad (1),
.BR pfilt (1)
