.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH BGRAPH 1 6/24/98 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
bgraph - do a set of batch graphs to a metafile
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bgraph
[
.B \-type ..
][
.B +variable value ..
][
.B file ..
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Bgraph
reads each graph
.I file
in sequence and converts it to a plot suitable
for use by a metafile driver program.
If no files are given, the standard input is read.
.PP
The graph type can be defined with a
.I \-type
option.
Types are simply include files which set default values for
certain variables.
The actual include file name is the type concatanated with ".plt".
Typical types are "scatter", "line", and "curve".
A scatter graph shows only points.
A line graph shows only lines connecting points.
A curve graph shows both points and connecting lines.
.PP
Variables can be set explicitly with
.I +variable value
options.
The following standard graph variables are supported:
.TP 10n
.BR fthick
The frame thickness, valued from 0 to 4.
A value of 0 turns the frame off.
.TP
.BR grid
The grid: 1 is on, 0 is off.
.TP
.BR include
The include file name.
Graph input is taken from the file.
If the file is not found in the current directory, it is
searched for in a set of standard locations.
.TP
.BR legend
The legend title.
.TP
.BR othick
The origin axis thickness, valued from 0 to 4.
A value of 0 turns the origin off.
.TP
.BR period
The period for a polar plot.
For a plot in degrees, use 360.
For radians, use 6.283.
A value of 0 (the default) indicates a Cartesian plot.
.TP
.BR subtitle
The graph subtitle.
.TP
.BR symfile
The point symbol metafile.
.TP
.BR tstyle
The frame tick mark style.
The default value is 1, which is outward tick marks.
A value of 2 is inward ticks, 3 is cross ticks.
A value of 0 disables frame tick marks.
.TP
.BR title
The graph title.
.TP
.BR xlabel
The x axis label.
.TP
.BR xmap
The x axis mapping function.
An x axis mapping xmap(x)=log(x) produces a log x axis.
.TP
.BR xmax
The x axis maximum.
.TP
.BR xmin
The x axis minimum.
.TP
.BR xstep
The x axis step.
.TP
.BR ylabel
The y axis label.
.TP
.BR ymap
The y axis mapping function.
An y axis mapping ymap(y)=log(y) produces a log y axis.
.TP
.BR ymax
The y axis maximum.
.TP
.BR ymin
The y axis minimum.
.TP
.BR ystep
The y axis step.
.PP
In addition to the standard graph variables, each curve
has a set of variables.
The variables for curve 'A' all begin with the letter 'A';
the variables for curve 'B' all begin with the letter 'B',
and so on.
Up to 8 curves are supported on a single graph, 'A'
through 'H'.
The variables for curve 'A' are:
.TP 10n
.BR A
The function for curve 'A'.
If
.I Adata
is undefined,
.I xmin,
.I xmax
and
.I Anpoints
are used to determine which x values to plot.
If
.I Adata
is defined and
.I A
is a function of a single variable (ie. A(x)),
data values are interpreted as x values to be plotted.
If
.I Adata
is defined and
.I A
is a function of two variables (ie. A(x,y)),
data values are interpreted as (x,y) pairs and
.I A
becomes a mapping function for the data.
.TP
.BR Acolor
The color for curve A.
The values 1-4 map to black, red, green, and blue respectively.
A value of 0 turns curve A off.
.TP
.BR Adata
The point data for curve 'A'.
If
.I Adata
is set to the name of a file,
data is read and interpreted from that file.
If
.I Adata
is set to a command (beginning with an exclamation, '!'),
the output of the command is read as data.
Otherwise, data is read from the current file.
Data values are separated by white space and/or commas.
A semicolon or end of file indicates the end of data.
.TP
.BR Alabel
The label for curve 'A'.
The curve label is printed in the legend when a curve is defined.
.TP
.BR Alintype
The line type for curve 'A', valued from 0 to 4.
A value of 0 turns line drawing off.
A value of 1 is solid, 2 is dashed, 3 is dotted, and 4 is dot-dashed.
.TP
.BR Anpoints
The number of symbol points for curve 'A'.
If
.I Adata
is defined, all points will be connected with the selected
curve line, but only
.I Anpoints
points will be indicated with a symbol.
This prevents messy graphs when large number of points are defined.
If
.I A
is defined and
.I Adata
is not,
.I Anpoints
is used along with
.I xmin
and
.I xmax
to determine which x values to plot.
.TP
.BR Asymsize
The symbol radius for curve 'A'.
The default size is 100.
A value of 0 turns symbols off.
.TP
.BR Asymtype
This is the name of a segment in
.I symfile
which defines the graphics symbol for curve 'A'.
.TP
.BR Athick
The line thickness for curve 'A', valued from 0 to 4.
A thickness of 0 turns line drawing off.
.SH "GRAPH FILE FORMAT"
A graph file contains definitions for graph and curve
variables.
These definitions fall one per line in the following formats:
.nf

	vreal        = expression       # real variable
	vfunction(x) = expression(x)    # function
	vstring      = "string"         # string variable
	vdata        = filename         # data file
	vdata        = "!command"       # data generator
	variable     = continued \\
	        line                    # newline escaped
	vdata        =                  # data
		v1 v2 v3 v4 ... ;

.fi
Comments are preceded by a '#', and continue to the end
of the line.
Except for comments, the newline can be escaped with a backslash.
Note that in the special case where data is contained in
the graph file, a definition will continue over more than
one line.
Data values can be separated by commas or white space, and
reading continues until a semicolon is reached.
No comments are allowed in the data section of a file.
.PP
An expression is an algebraic formula containing numbers,
variables, functions, and the standard operators
{+,-,*,/,^,(,)} (see icalc(1)).
Besides the variables described in the last section,
definitions of intermediate real variables and functions
are allowed for convenience.
They may be used in expressions of graph and curve variables.
.SH EXAMPLE
A file to graph the sine function is:
.nf

	title = "Sine Function from 0 to Pi"
	PI = 3.141592653589793
	A(x) = sin(x)
	xmin = 0
	xmax = PI
	Anpoints = 100

.fi
Or, to graph selected points:
.nf

	title = "Sine Function at 0, .2, .6, and .8"
	A(x) = sin(x)
	Adata =
		0 , .2
		.6 , .8
	;

.fi
The commands to plot these files might be:
.nf

	bgraph \-line sine1.plt | psmeta | lpr

	bgraph \-curve +ymin \-1 +ymax 1 sine2.plt | x11meta

.fi
.SH FILES
/usr/local/lib/meta/*.mta
/usr/local/lib/meta/*.plt
*.plt
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH BUGS
There is no mechanism provided for undefining a variable.
An axis mapping function which is not invertible (monotonically
increasing or decreasing) confuses the program terribly.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
dgraph(1), gcomp(1), icalc(1), igraph(1),
metafile(5), x11meta(1)
