.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH BSDFVIEW 1 8/11/2017 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
bsdfview - view a BSDF representation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bsdfview
[
.B "\-q {Hi|Med|Lo}"
][
.B \-t
|
rad options
]
input ..
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Bsdfview
renders a BSDF description interactively.
This is a script that creates a
.I rad(1)
input file (RIF),
which builds an octree via
.I bsdf2rad(1),
then renders the scene interactively or calls the
.I trad(1)
graphical user interface if the
.I \-t
option is given.
.PP
The input is either a single XML file, such as might be produced by
.I genBSDF(1),
.I bsdf2klems(1),
or
.I bsdf2ttree(1),
or up to four scattering interpolation representation (SIR) files, as
might be produced by
pabopto2bsdf(1).
.PP
A
.I rad
input file will be produced, whose name matches the root of
the first input file but with any leading path removed (i.e., in
the current directory).
This RIF may be reused for subsequent viewing and rendering via
.I rad
without incurring the cost of another call to
.I bsdf2rad.
.PP
The quality preference may be set via the
.I \-q
option.
The number of processors to use may be specified with the 
.I \-n
option.
.PP
The program creates a number of views accessible via the
.I rvu(1)
"L" command:
.TP 10n
.BR def
The default view, showing the back and front BRDFs.
.TP
.BR fr
A view of the front reflection hemisphere.
.TP
.BR br
A view of the back reflection hemisphere.
.TP
.BR ft
A fisheye view of the front transmission hemisphere (from underneath).
.TP
.BR bt
A fisheye view of the back transmission hemisphere.
.TP
.BR pr
A parallel view of both reflection hemispheres from directly overhead.
.TP
.BR pt
A parallel view of both transmission hemispheres from directly underneath.
.PP
Additionally, all the standard views that
.I rvu
defines will be available (e.g., "xZ", "zl", etc.).
.PP
Since a
.I rad
input file is created by the script, it may be used
in subsequent runs as long as the temporary files remain.
These are typically kept until the next reboot of the operating
system, so re-running
.I bsdfview
with the same arguments will not require re-running
.I bsdf2rad
or
.I oconv.
Thus, start-up will be much quicker, unless the temporary files have
been removed.
In this case, the script may exit with an error indicating that the
.I rad
input file needs to be removed.
.PP
This input file may also be re-used directly from the command line using
.I rad
or
.I trad(1).
This may be useful for generating RADIANCE pictures corresponding
to the above standard views.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
bsdf2klems(1), bsdf2rad(1), bsdf2ttree(1), genBSDF(1),
objview(1), oconv(1), pabopto2bsdf(1), rad(1), rvu(1), trad(1)
