.TH DCGLARE
.SH NAME
dcglare - compute glare in annual simulation time-step(s) via matrix
multiplication
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dcglare
[
.B "\-n nsteps"
][
.B "\-h"
][
.B "\-i{f|d}
][
.B "\-o{f|d}
][
.B "\-l
.I val
][
.B "\-b
.I val
][{
.B "\-sf
.I file
|
.B "\-ss
.I h
.B "\-so
.I h
}][
.B "\-vu
.I dx dy dz
]{
.B "\-vd
.I dx dy dz
|
.B "\-vf
.I file
[
.B "\-vi{f|d}
]}
.B DCdirect
.B DCtotal
[
.B skyf
]
.br
.B dcglare
[
.B "\-n nsteps"
][
.B "\-h"
][
.B "\-i{f|d}
][
.B "\-o{f|d}
][
.B "\-l
.I val
][
.B "\-b
.I val
][{
.B "\-sf
.I file
|
.B "\-ss
.I h
.B "\-so
.I h
}][
.B "\-vu
.I dx dy dz
]{
.B "\-vd
.I dx dy dz
|
.B "\-vf
.I file
[
.B "\-vi{f|d}
]}
.B DCdirect
.B Vspec
.B Tbsdf
.B Dmat.dat
[
.B skyf
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dcglare
generates daylight glare probability (DGP) predictions for multiple points in a
space under a variety of daylit conditions. Usually, it is used to produce
hourly DGP values for an entire year, or if the
.I \-l
option is provided, it calculates glare autonomy based on an annual occupancy
schedule.
.PP
As input,
.I dcglare
requires daylight coefficient matrices relating the illuminance at each view
point to the brightness of each sky patch. Two such matrices are required.
The first,
.I DCdirect
, consists of direct views to the sky only and is calculated by
.I rcontrib(1)
using a single ambient bounce. The second,
.I DCtotal
, includes the total direct and diffuse contribution of each sky patch.
The latter can be calculated directly by
.I rcontrib(1)
as in the two-phase method, or internally as in the three-phase method if given
view, BSDF, and daylight matrices. In this respect,
.I dcglare
is similar to
.I dctimestep(1)
except that it calculates DGP instead of irradiance. 
The final input is the sky contribution matrix, usually computed by
.I gendaymtx(1)
, which may be passed on the standard input.
For efficiency, matrices stored in files can be represented as binary float data
if machine byte-order is not an issue.
.PP
In the imageless method for calculating DGP, each visible sky patch acts
as a glare source if it's brightness is above a threshold set by the
.I \-b
option. This option behaves similarly to the option in
.I evalglare(1)
as described below. 
Imageless DGP calculation also requires that the view direction must be
specified for each view to orient it relative to the given sky patches.
If all views are oriented in the same direction,
.I \-vd
can be used to specify the view direction vector.
Alternatively, a view file can be specified by the
.I \-vf
option. The format for this file is the same as the input format expected by
.I rcontrib(1)
, and for simplicity, the same file can be provided as input to both programs.
The
.I \-vif
or
.I \-vid
option may be used to specify that view data is in float or double format,
respectively.
The up vector
.I \-vu
is used together with the direction vector to calculate the Guth index for each
sky patch relative to each view.
While each entry in the view file may have a unique view direction, a single up
vector is used for all views. The default up vector is in the positive
.I z
direction.
.PP
Glare autonomy refers to the fraction of occupied hours in which a view is free
of glare. When a glare limit is specified with the
.I \-l
option,
.I dcglare
will calculate the fraction of sky conditions from the sky matrix in which DGP
is less than this limit. In this case, individual DGP values are not recorded.
By default, all entries in the sky matrix are included in the glare autonomy
calculation, unless limitted by the
.I \-n
option.
However, you may exclude certain entries by creating an occupancy schedule.
This is useful if the sky matrix built with
.I gendaymtx(1)
contains all hours of a year, but the space will only be occupied at certain
times. You may specify an occupancy schedule file with the
.I \-sf
option. This file should be in comma-separated value format with the same number
of rows as in the sky matrix. The last entry of each line is read as a numeric
value that should be greater than zero for occupied times. Lines may be
commented with a '#' character.
This format is compatible with Daysim schedule files.
Alternatively, if the sky matrix contains 24 entries per day corresponding to
one per hour, uniform daily start and end hours for occupancy can be specified
with the
.I \-ss
and
.I \-se
options. No adjustment is made for daylight savings time.
.PP
In addition to these, you may specify options from
.I dctimestep(1)
with the exception of
.I \-o
because image rendering is not supported.
.TP 12n
.BI -l \ val
Set the limit for glare occurrence to
.I val
\&. When this option is provided, the program calculates glare autonomy,
where any DGP value at or above the limit
.I val
indicates the presence of glare. If the option is not provided, the program
calculates DGP under each sky condition in the sky matrix instead.
.TP
.BI -b \ val
Set the threshold factor to
.I val
\&. If
.I val
is larger than 100, it is used as constant threshold in cd/m2. If
.I val
is less or equal than 100, this factor multiplied by the average luminance in
each view will be used as threshold for detecting the glare sources (not
recommended). The default value is 2000 (fixed threshold method).
.TP
.BI -vf \ file
Get the list of views for DGP calculation from
.I file
\&. Each line in
.I file
contains six numeric values corresponding to the position and direction
of a view. Generally, this is the same file that is used as input to
.I rcontrib(1)
to create the daylight coefficient matrices
.TP
.BI -vd " xd yd zd"
Set the view forward vector (vertical direction) for DGP calculation to
.I xd yd zd
\&. This option is ignored when the
.I \-vf
option is provided.
.TP
.BI -vu " xd yd zd"
Set the view up vector (vertical direction) for DGP calculation to
.I xd yd zd
\&. The default up vector is the positive
.I z
direction.
.TP
.BI -vi t
Set the format of the view file to
.I t
\&. Available options are 'f' for single and 'd' for double precison IEEE float.
The default when no value is provided is to use ASCII.
.TP
.BI -sf \ file
Set the occupancy schedule file to
.I file
\&. In the event that the sky matrix includes unoccupied hours that should not
contribute to the glare autonomy calculation,
.I file
will be read to determine which entries from the sky file matrix will be
included in this calculation. Each line of
.I file
is expected to contain a numeric value at the end of a comma-delimited list,
with zero corresponding to unoccupied.
This argument is used only if
.I -l
is specified.
.TP
.BI -ss \ h
Set the occupancy start hour to
.I h
\&. This option is provided for expediency when no occupancy schedule file is
available. It is assumed that the sky matrix includes 24 entries per day,
corresponding to one per hour. This argument is used only if
.I -l
is specified.
.TP
.BI -se \ h
Set the occupancy end hour to
.I h
\&. This option is provided for expediency when no occupancy schedule file is
available. It is assumed that the sky matrix includes 24 entries per day,
corresponding to one per hour. This argument is used only if
.I -l
is specified.
.SH EXAMPLES
To generate an hourly matrix of DGP where output columns are time steps and rows
correspond to views in the file views.vf:
.IP "" .2i
gendaymtx -of Tampa.wea > sky.smx
.IP "" .2i
rcontrib -e MF:1 -f reinhartb.cal -b rbin -bn Nrbins -m sky_mat -I+ -ab 1
-ad 50000 -lw .00002 -lr -10 -faf scene.oct < views.vf > dc1.mtx
.IP "" .2i
rcontrib -e MF:1 -f reinhartb.cal -b rbin -bn Nrbins -m sky_mat -I+ -ab 8
-ad 50000 -lw .00002 -lr -10 -faf scene.oct < views.vf > dc8.mtx
.IP "" .2i
dcglare -vf views.vf dc1.mtx dc8.mtx sky.smx > dgp.txt
.PP
To calculate glare autonomy based on a 40% DGP limit using the same matrices:
.IP "" .2i
dcglare -vf views.vf -sf 8to6withDST.60min.occ.csv -l .4 dc1.mtx dc8.mtx
sky.smx > ga.txt
.PP
To generate an hourly matrix of DGP values from Skylight3 using a 3-phase
calculation, where output columns are time steps:
.IP "" .2i
gendaymtx NYCity.wea | dcglare dc1.mtx WPpts.vmx shade3.xml Skylight3.dmx
> wp_win3.dat
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel Jones
.SH SEE ALSO
dctimestep(1), gendaymtx(1), rcontrib(1), evalglare(1)
