.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH FIELDCOMB 1 9/6/2005 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
fieldcomb - combine two or more field frames for video animation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fieldcomb
[
.B "-e|-o"
][
.B \-r
]
[
.B "-f combined.hdr"
]
.B "field0.hdr field1.hdr .."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Fieldcomb
combines two or more field frames into half as many final video frames
for field-based animations.
Normally, the even scanlines in the output are given over to the first,
third, fifth, etc. pictures given on the input, and the odd scanlines are
given over to the second, fourth, sixth, etc. pictures on the input.
This behavior corresponds to the
.I \-e
option, which is set by default.
To reverse this ordering, the
.I \-o
option must be specified.
.PP
Normally,
.I fieldcomb
will name output frames by dividing the numbers on the input field
file names by 2, inserting a 'C' right before the number, adding
leading zeroes to make it always four digits.
For example, the command:
.IP "" .2i
fieldcomb anim12.hdr anim13.hdr anim14.hdr anim15.hdr
.PP
will produce two output pictures:
.IP "" .2i
animC0006.hdr & animC0007.hdr
.PP
If an odd number of input files is given on the command line, the last file
is held over and used as the first file in the next invocation of
.I fieldcomb
in the same directory.
In this way, the program works well with the "TRANSFER" facility of
.I ranimate(1),
which does not guarantee an even number of frames will be passed every time.
.PP
If only two input files are given, the
.I \-f
option may be used to specify a different output name of the user's choosing.
.PP
If the
.I \-r
option is specified, then the input files will be removed once they have
been combined.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Work on this program was sponsored by Iebele Abel.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getinfo(1), pcomb(1), pfilt(1), phisto(1), ran2tiff(1), ranimate(1), rpict(1)
