.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH FINDGLARE 1 11/15/93 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
findglare - locate glare sources in a RADIANCE scene
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B findglare
[
.B \-v
][
.B "\-ga angles"
][
.B "\-t threshold"
][
.B "\-r resolution"
][
.B \-c
][
.B "\-p picture"
][
view options
] [[
rtrace options
]
.B octree
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Findglare
locates sources of glare in a specific set of horizontal directions
by computing luminance samples from a RADIANCE picture and/or octree.
.I Findglare
is intended primarily as a preprocessor for glare calculation
programs such as
.I glarendx(1),
and is usually accessed through the executive script
.I glare(1).
.PP
If only an octree is given,
.I findglare
calls rtrace to compute the samples it needs.
If both an octree and a picture are specified,
.I findglare
calls rtrace only for samples that are outside the frame of
the picture.
If 
.I findglare
does not have an octree and the picture does not completely cover
the area of interest, a warning will be issued and everything
outside the picture will be treated as if it were black.
It is preferable to use a picture with a fisheye view
and a horizontal and vertical size of at least 180 degrees (more
horizontally if the
.I \-ga
option is used -- see below).
Note that the picture file must contain correct view specifications,
as maintained by
.I rpict(1),
.I rvu(1),
.I pfilt(1)
and
.I pinterp(1).
Specifically,
.I findglare
will not work on pictures processed by
.I pcompos(1)
or
.I pcomb(1).
It is also essential to give the proper rtrace options when an
octree is used so that the calculated luminance values are correct.
.PP
The output of
.I findglare
is a list of glare source directions, solid angles and average
luminances, plus a list of indirect vertical illuminance values
as a function of angle.
Angles are measured in degrees from the view center,
with positive angles to the left and negative angles to the right.
.PP
By default,
.I findglare
only computes glare sources and indirect vertical illuminance
for the given view (taken from the picture if none is specified).
If the view direction is not horizontal to begin with
(ie. perpendicular to the view up vector),
.I findglare
will substitute the closest horizontal direction as its view
center.
The
.I \-ga
option can be used to specify a set of directions to consider
about the center of view.
This specification is given by a starting angle, ending angle, and
step angle like so:
.nf
	start-end:step
.fi
All angles must be whole degrees within the range 1 to 180.
Multiple angle ranges may be separated by commas, and individual
angles may be given without the ending and step angles.
Note that
.I findglare
will complain if the same angle is given twice either explicitly
or implicitly by two ranges.
.PP
.I Findglare
normally identifies glare sources as directions that are
brighter than 7 times the average luminance level.
It is possible to override this determination by giving an
explicit luminance threshold with the
.I \-t
option.
It usually works best to use the 'l' command within
.I ximage(1)
to decide what this value should be.
Alternatively, one can use the 't' command within
.I rvu(1).
The idea is to pick a threshold that is well above the average level
but smaller than the source areas.
.PP
If the sources in the scene are small, it may be necessary to
increase the default sample resolution of
.I findglare(1)
using the
.I \-r
option.
The default resolution is 150 vertical samples and a proportional number
of horizontal samples.
If besides being small, the sources are not much brighter than the
threshold, the
.I \-c
flag should be used to override
.I findglare's
default action of absorbing small sources it deems to be
insignificant.
.PP
The
.I \-v
flag switches on verbose mode, where
.I findglare
reports its progress during the calculation.
.SH EXAMPLE
To calculate the glare sources in the image "scene.hdr":
.IP "" .2i
findglare \-p scene.hdr > scene.glr
.PP
To compute the Guth visual comfort probability from this result:
.IP "" .2i
glarendx \-t guth_vcp scene.glr
.PP
To compute the glare for a set of angles around the view "good.vp"
from the octree "scene.oct" using an ambient level of .1:
.IP "" .2i
findglare \-vf good.vp \-ga 10-60:10 \-av .1 .1 .1 scene.oct > scene.glr
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Work on this program was initiated and sponsored by the LESO
group at EPFL in Switzerland.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getinfo(1), glare(1), glarendx(1), pfilt(1), rpict(1), rtrace(1),
rvu(1), xglaresrc(1), ximage(1)
