.\" RCSid "$Id: genbox.1,v 1.5 2021/04/09 01:48:20 greg Exp $"
.TH GENBOX 1 11/15/93 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
genbox - generate a RADIANCE or Wavefront description of a box
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "genbox mat name xsiz ysiz zsiz"
[
.B \-i
][
.B "\-b bev"
|
.B "\-r rad"
[
.B "\-n nseg
]
][
.B \-o
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Genbox
produces a RADIANCE scene description of a parallelepiped
with one corner at the origin and the opposite corner at
.I "(xsiz, ysiz, zsiz)."
The sides of the box will be parallel to the three coordinate
planes.
The surfaces that make up the box will be modified by
.I mat
and their identifiers will begin with
.I name.
.PP
The
.I \-i
option can be used to produce a box with inward directed surface
normals.
.PP
The
.I \-b
option can be used to specify the indentation for beveled edges.
.PP
The
.I \-r
option can be used to specify the radius for rounded edges, which
are modeled as cylinders and spheres for non-inverted RADIANCE output.
However, this type of model only makes sense for external views of
an opaque object.
If a rounded box is inverted using
.I \-i,
then the corners and edges are modeled with polygons, instead.
This option can also be forced by specifying a minum number of
segments with the
.I \-n
option.
.PP
The
.I \-o
option specifies Wavefront .OBJ output, and
also forces polygons to be used with the
.I \-r
option.
In this case, vertex normals are also produced for smooth rendering.
.SH EXAMPLE
To produce a rectangular box made of wood with rounded edges:
.IP "" .2i
genbox wood box1 5 8 3 \-r .5 > box1.rad
.PP
To produce a box made of crystal with beveled edges:
.IP "" .2i
genbox crystal box2 3 7 1 \-b .1 > box2.rad
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH BUGS
Because spheres and cylinders are used to construct boxes with
rounded edges, a transparent box of this type appears quite messy.
The preferred alternative in this case is the
.I \-n
option, which produces polygons, instead.
However, normal smoothing is only applied to the Wavefront .OBJ output,
so this must be passed through
.I obj2rad
to get perfectly smooth results.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
genrev(1), gensurf(1), genworm(1), obj2mesh(1), obj2rad(1),
robjutil(1), rpict(1), rvu(1), xform(1)
