.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH GETINFO 1 1/15/99 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
getinfo - get header information from a RADIANCE file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B getinfo
[
.B -d
][
.B "file .."
]
.br
.B getinfo
-
.br
.B getinfo
.B -a
.B "info_line1 .."
.br
.B getinfo
.B -c
.B "command .."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Getinfo
reads the header of each RADIANCE
.I file
and writes it to the standard output.
Octree and picture files are in a binary format, which makes
it difficult to determine their content.
Therefore, a few lines of text are placed at the beginning
of each file by the RADIANCE program that creates it.
The end of the header information and the start of the
data is indicated by an empty line.
The
.I \-d
option can be used to print the dimensions of an octree or
picture file instead.
For an octree,
.I "getinfo \-d"
prints the bounding cube (xmin ymin zmin size).
For a picture,
.I "getinfo \-d"
prints the y and x resolution (\-Y yres +X xres).
If no
.I file
is given, the standard input is read.
.PP
The second form of
.I getinfo
with a hyphen simply removes the header
and copies the body of the file from the standard
input to the standard output.
.PP
The third form of
.I "getinfo \-a"
adds one or more header lines to the standard input.
These lines are given as arguments to
.I getinfo,
and must be quoted if they contain spaces.
.PP
The fourth form of
.I "getinfo \-c"
is followed by a command and its arguments, which is executed
on the data segment of the standard input.
The header is passed along, with the addition of the command
at the end.
This is roughly equivalent to the following sequence, but does not
require the input to be in a file:
.IP "" .2i
( getinfo < input ; getinfo - < input | command .. )
.SH EXAMPLE
To print the header information from scene1.oct and scene2.hdr:
.IP "" .2i
getinfo scene1.oct scene2.hdr
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
oconv(1), pfilt(1), rcalc(1), rhinfo(1), rpict(1), rvu(1)
