.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH HISTO 1 9/6/96 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
histo - compute 1-dimensional histogram of N data columns
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "histo [-c][-p] xmin xmax nbins"
.br
.B "histo [-c][-p] imin imax"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Histo
bins columnular data on the standard input between the given minimum
and maximum values.
If three command line arguments are given, the third is taken as the
number of data bins between the first two real numbers.
If only two arguments are given, they are both assumed to be integers,
and the number of data bins will be equal to their difference plus one.
The bins are always of equal size.
.PP
The output is N+1 columns of data (for N columns input), where the
first column is the centroid of each division, and each row
corresponds to the frequencies for each column around that value.
.PP
If the
.I \-c
option is present, then
.I histo
computes the cumulative histogram for each column instead of the
straight frequencies.
The upper value of each bin is printed also instead of the centroid.
This may be useful in computing percentiles, for example.
Values below the minimum specified are still counted in the cumulative
total.
.PP
The
.I \-p
option tells
.I histo
to report the percentage of the total number of input lines rather
than the absolute counts.
In the case of a cumulative total, this yields the percentile values
directly.
Values above the maximum are counted as well as values below in
this case.
.PP
All input data is interpreted as real values, and columns must be
white-space separated.
If any value is less than the minimum or greater than the maximum,
it will be ignored unless the
.I \-c
option is specified.
.SH EXAMPLE
To count data values between \-1 and 1 in 50 bins:
.IP "" .2i
histo \-1 1 50 < input.dat
.PP
To count frequencies of integers between 0 and 255:
.IP "" .2i
histo 0 255 < input.dat
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cnt(1), neaten(1), rcalc(1), rcollate(1), rlam(1), tabfunc(1), total(1)
