.TH "LTPICT" "1" "08/04/14" "RADIANCE" ""
.SH "NAME"
ltpict \- render a four\-view image of a light source
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B ltpict
[
.B \-i
][
.B "\-d dimensions"
]
input
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.I ltpict
is a script that renders a four\-view HDR image of a Radiance luminaire
or IES photometric file.  The
.I \-i
option tells it that the file name given is 
an IES photometry file rather then a Radiance description of a 
luminiare.  In this case, Radiance's
.I ies2rad(1)
is called with its default settings to convert the IES file to a 
Radiance object.
.PP 
The four projections presented are the lower hemisphere
(displayed in the upper left quadrant), the upper hemisphere
(upper right), the C0\-C180 plane (lower left) and the
C90\-C270 plane (lower right).
.PP 
Only one Radiance luminaire description or IES photometry file
may be given.  No input is accepted on STDIN.
.PP 
The output image in HDR format is produced on STDOUT with
the default dimensions of 1024 by 1024 pixels.  The dimensions
may be overwritten with the 
.I "\-d dimensions
option which takes an integer that is divisible by two.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
To render a four\-view image of photometry file ABC123.ies
and save the result to luminaire.hdr
.IP "" .2i
ltpict \-i ABC123.ies > luminaire.hdr
.PP 
To render a small four\-view HDR image of the 
RADIANCE luminaire XYZ456.rad to STDOUT, and display it with ximage
.IP "" .2i
ltpict \-d 400 XYZ456.rad | ximage
.SH "AUTHOR"
Axel Jacobs
.SH "SEE ALSO"
objline(1), objview(1), objpict(1), ies2rad(1), ltview(1)
