.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH META2BMP 1 6/24/98 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
meta2bmp - convert metafile to Windows Bitmap (BMP) File
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meta2bmp
[
.B \-c | \-r
][
.B "\-x width"
][
.B "\-y height"
][
.B "\-m minrad"
][
.B "\-o outname"
]
file ..
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Meta2bmp
reads each metafile
.I file
in sequence and converts it to a compressed, color-mapped BMP file.
The result is sent to the standard output (which must be redirected)
unless the
.I \-o
option is used.
The argument to the
.I \-o
option specifies the base file name, to which a page number and ".bmp" is added
as a suffix.
Note that this option must be present in order to produce more than a single
page of output.
.PP
The default output resolution is 400 by 400, but a different resolution
can be given with the
.I \-x
and
.I \-y
options.
.PP
The
.I \-m
option can be used to set a minimum value for the line radius in pixels.
This may be helpful for improving the readability of high resolution output.
The default value is 0, which allows lines of one pixel thickness.
.PP
If the option
.I \-c
is specified, the input files are only conditioned for output, ie.
expanded (see pexpand).
This is useful if many copies of the same output is desired.
If the option
.I \-r
is instead specified, the input is assumed already to be conditioned.
If no input files are specified, the standard input is read.
.SH EXAMPLE
To convert the plots examp1.plt and examp2.plt to 1024x1024 Targa files:
.IP "" .2i
bgraph examp1.plt examp2.plt | meta2bmp \-o examp \-x 1024 \-y 1024
.SH FILES
see pexpand(1) and psort(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
bgraph(1), igraph(1), meta2tga(1), pexpand(1), psmeta(1),
psort(1), ra_t8(1)
