.\" RCSid $Id$
.TH PKGBSDF 1 6/23/2011 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
pkgBSDF - package BSDFs provided as XML for Radiance
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pkgBSDF
[
.B \-i
][
.B \-s
]
.B "bsdf.xml .."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I PkgBSDF
takes one or more XML files, each describing the bidirectional scattering
distribution function of a surface or geometric system, and packages
them into RADIANCE scene descriptions.
If the input file(s) do not begin with a '.' or '/', the directories
in the RAYPATH environment variable will be searched.
One rectangle is produced for each BSDF that has
no detail geometry and/or no rear-side reflectance distribution.
If both front and back reflectance distributions are present with
detail geometry, then two rectangles will be used to sandwich
the geometry extracted from the BSDF file.
The front surface will always be centered just in front of the
origin facing the positive Z-direction, with "up" in the positive
Y-direction.
The back surface, if present, will parallel the front surface at
a distance slightly greater than the BSDF system thickness.
Scene units will always be in meters.
.PP
The
.I \-i
option causes
.I pkgBSDF
to produce frozen octree instances for any detail geometry,
which may reduce memory requirements in scenes with many
references to the same complex BSDF object.
.PP
Normally,
.I pkgBSDF
produces one RADIANCE scene file for each XML input, replacing
the required '.xml' suffix with '.rad' and writing to the current directory.
The
.I \-s
option sends the RADIANCE scene description to the standard
output rather than writing it to a file, but only works
for a single XML input.
Any instance octree is still written out to a file generated
by replacing the '.xml' suffix with '.oct' in the same directory.
.SH EXAMPLE
Package all the XML files in the current directory as Radiance
scene files, employing frozen octree instances for any
detail geometry:
.IP "" .2i
pkgBSDF -i *.xml
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
genBSDF(1), oconv(1), xform(1)
