.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH PSIGN 1 10/9/97 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
psign - produce a RADIANCE picture from text.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B psign
[
.B options
]
[
.B text
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Psign
produces a RADIANCE picture of the given
.I text.
The output dimensions are determined by the character height, aspect
ratio, number of lines and line length.
(Also the character size if text squeezing is used.)\0
If no
.I text
is given, the standard input is read.
.TP 10n
.BI -cb " r g b"
Set the background color to
.I "r g b"
The default is white (1 1 1).
.TP
.BI -cf " r g b"
Set the foreground color to
.I "r g b"
The default is black (0 0 0).
.TP
.BR \-dr
Text reads to the right (default).
.TP
.BR \-du
Text reads upwards.
.TP
.BR \-dl
Text reads to the left (upside down).
.TP
.BR \-dd
Text reads downwards.
.TP
.BI -h \ cheight
Set the character height to
.I cheight.
The default is 32 pixels.
.TP
.BI -a \ aspect
Set the character aspect ratio (height/width) to
.I aspect.
The default value is 1.67.
.TP
.BI -x \ xsize
Set the horizontal image size to
.I xsize.
Use with
.I \-y
option (below) in place of the
.I \-h
specification to control output image size directly.
If the character aspect ratio
.I (\-a
option, above) is non-zero, then one of the specified x or y output
dimensions may be reduced to maintain this ratio.
If direction is right
.I (\-dr)
or left
.I (\-dl),
then it is not necessary to give the
.I \-y
option, since it can be computed from the character height
.I (\-h).
.TP
.BI -y \ ysize
Set the vertical image size to
.I ysize.
Use with the
.I \-x
option (described above).
If direction is up
.I (\-du)
or down
.I (\-dd),
then it is not necessary to give the
.I \-x
option, since it can be computed from the character height
.I (\-h).
.TP
.BI -s \ spacing
Set the intercharacter spacing to
.I spacing.
The magnitude of this value is multiplied by the character height over
the aspect ratio (ie. the character width) to compute the desired
distance between characters in the output.
The sign of the value, positive or negative, determines how this
ideal spacing is used in the actual placement of characters.
If
.I spacing
is positive, then the overall width of the line will not be affected,
nor will indentation of textual elements.
Thus, the text format will be mostly unaffected.
However, spacing between characters will reflect their relative size
for a more natural appearance.
If
.I spacing
is negative, characters will be squeezed together to meet the
spacing critereon, regardless of how it might affect the format of
the output.
The default value for
.I spacing
is zero, which is interpreted as uniformly spaced characters.
.TP
.BI -f \ fontfile
Load the font from
.I fontfile.
The default font is helvet.fnt
.SH EXAMPLE
To put a big "Hi!" on the terminal:
.IP "" .2i
psign \-h 22 \-a 1 \-cb 0 0 0 \-cf 1 1 1 Hi\\! | ttyimage
.SH ENVIRONMENT
RAYPATH		path to search for font files
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH BUGS
The entire bitmap is stored in memory, which can be a problem for
large and/or high-resolution signs.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getinfo(1), pcompos(1), pfilt(1), ttyimage(1)
