.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH PVALUE 1 1/15/99 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
pvalue - convert RADIANCE picture to/from alternate formats
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pvalue
[
.B options
]
[
.B file
]
.br
.B "pvalue -r"
[
.B options
]
[
.B file1
[
.B "file2 file3"
]
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Pvalue
converts the pixels of a RADIANCE picture to or from another format.
In the default mode, pixels are sent to the
standard output, one per line, in the following ascii format:

	xpos	ypos	red	green	blue

If no
.I file
is given, the standard input is read.
.PP
The reverse conversion option
.I (-r)
may be used with a single input file or when reading from the
standard input, but if the second form is used with three separate
input files, the three primaries are presumed to be separated in
these files.
.TP 10n
.BR \-u
Print only unique values in the output, skipping runs of equal pixels.
Specifying
.I \+u
turns this option off, which is the default.
.TP
.BR \-o
Print original values, before exposure compensation.
If the input file is in XYZE format, the Y (green) channel
will correspond to units of candelas/meter^2.
Otherwise, the RGB values should be in spectral watts/steradian/meter^2.
Specifying
.I \+o
uses final exposed values, which is the default.
.TP
.BR \-h
Do not print header.
Specifying
.I \+h
causes the header to be printed, which is the default.
.TP
.BI \-H
Do not print the resolution string.
(See also the
.I \-r
option below.)
Specifying an input resolution for reverse conversion also turns
this option off.
Specifying
.I \+H
causes the resolution string to be printed, which is the default.
.TP
.BI \-s \ nbytes
Skip the specified number of bytes on the input header.
This option is useful for skipping unintelligible headers in
foreign file formats.
(Does not work when reading from standard input.)
.TP
.BI \-e \ exposure
Adjust the exposure by the amount specified.
If the exposure is being given as a conversion factor, use
.I \+e
instead, so an EXPOSURE line will not be recorded in the header
(if any).
.TP
.BI \-g \ gamma
Set gamma correction for conversion.
When converting from a RADIANCE picture to another format,
the inverse gamma is applied to correct for monitor response.
When converting to a RADIANCE picture
.I (\-r
option), the gamma is applied directly to recover the linear values.
By default,
.I gamma
is set to 1.0, meaning no gamma correction is performed.
.TP
.BR \-d
Data only,
do not print x and y pixel position.
.TP
.BR \-da
Same as
.I \-d.
.TP
.BR \-di
Print ascii integer values from 0 to 255+.
If
.I \+di
is given, the integer values will be preceded by
the x and y pixel locations.
.TP
.BR \-db
Output binary byte values from 0 to 255.
.TP
.BR \-dw
Output binary 16-bit words from 0 to 65535.
.TP
.BR \-dW
Output binary 16-bit words from 0 to 65535, byte-swapped.
.TP
.BR \-df
Output binary float values.
.TP
.BR \-dF
Output byte-swapped binary float values.
.TP
.BR \-dd
Output binary double values.
.TP
.BR \-dD
Output byte-swapped binary double values.
.TP
.BR \-R
Reverse ordering of colors so that the output is blue then green
then red.
The default ordering (specified with
.I \+R)
is red then green then blue.
.TP
.BR \-n
The RGB values are non-interleaved, meaning that all the red, green
and blue data are stored together in separate chunks.
Interleaving may be turned on with the
.I \+n
option, which is the default.
.TP
.BR \-b
Print brightness values rather than RGB.
Specifying
.I \+b
turns this option off, which is the default.
.TP
.BI \-p P
Put out only the primary
.I P,
where
.I P
is one of upper or lower case 'R', 'G' or 'B' for red, green or
blue, respectively.
This option may be used to separate the Radiance primaries into
three files with three separate runs of
.I pvalue,
or only one file when only one primary is needed.
Note that there is no space between this option and its argument.
.TP
.BR \-r
Perform reverse conversion.
Input is in the format given by the other options.
The x and y resolution must be specified on the command line, unless
the image file contains a Radiance resolution string at the
beginning (see 
.I \-H
option above and
.I \-y
option below).
Specifying
.I \+r
converts from a Radiance picture to other values, which is the
default.
.TP
.BI \-p " xr yr xg yg xb yb xw yw"
On reverse conversion, RGB input uses the given set of color primaries.
These are written into the output header with the PRIMARIES variable.
.TP
.BR \-pXYZ
On reverse conversion, input is in CIE XYZ coordinates, rather than RGB.
The Y channel is assumed to be in candelas/meter^2.
.TP
.BI -y \ res
Set the output y resolution to
.I res.
If
.I \+y
is specified, then the scanlines are assumed to be in
increasing order (ie. bottom to top).
The default value for this option is 0, which means
that the picture size and scanline order must appear
as the first line after the header (if any) in the
input file.
Either an upper or lower case 'Y' may be used for this option.
Since Radiance files always contain such a line, 
this option has no effect for forward conversions.
.TP
.BI +x \ res
Set the output x resolution to
.I res.
If
.I \-x
is specified, then the scanlines are assumed to be in
decreasing order (ie. right to left).
The ordering of the
.I \-y
and
.I \+x
options determines whether the scanlines are sorted along
x or along y.
Most Radiance pictures are sorted top to bottom, then left
to right.
This corresponds to a specification of the form "\-y yres +x xres".
Either an upper or lower case 'X' may be used for this option.
Like the
.I \-y
option,
.I \-x
options have no effect for forward conversions.
.SH EXAMPLE
To look at the original, unique pixels in picture:
.IP "" .2i
pvalue \-o \-u picture | more
.PP
To convert from a 512x400 8-bit greyscale image in bottom to top,
left to right scanline ordering:
.IP "" .2i
pvalue \-r \-db \-b \-h +y 400 +x 512 input.im > flipped.hdr
.br
pflip \-v flipped.hdr > final.hdr
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH BUGS
The
.I \-r
option does not work with the
.I \-u
option.
Also, input pixel locations are ignored during a reverse
conversion, so this information is not used in determining
the scanline ordering or picture size.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getinfo(1), pcompos(1), pfilt(1), pflip(1),
protate(1), ra_xyze(1), rpict(1), rtrace(1), rvu(1)
