.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH RA_PICT 1 11/15/93 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
ra_pict - convert Radiance pictures to Macintosh PICT files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ra_pict
[
.B \-e +/-
.I stops
] [
.B \-v
] [
.B \-g
.I gamma
] [
.I infile
[
.I outfile
]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Ra_pict
converts a Radiance picture, as produced by
.B rpict
(1) to a Macintosh PICT file. The picture will be a 24 bit PICT 2 picture,
using a single bit map (DirectRect).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 10n
.BI \-g " gamma"
This sets an explict gamma correction for the image. If it is not
specified, the default value of 2.0 is used.
.TP
.B \-v
Invokes verbose mode, and gives line on standard error giving the
size of the picture and the gamma correction used.
.TP
.BI "\-e +/\-" " stops"
Adjusts the exposure by stops.
.TP
.I infile
Specifies the file to read the picture from. If none is specified,
it takes it from standard input. If standard input is used, then
the picture is sent to standard output.
.TP
.I outfile
Specifies the file to send the PICT file to. If none is specified,
it is sent to standard output.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
    ra_pict mypict.hdr mypict.pict
.PP
Will convert the Radiance picture mypict.hdr, giving the Macintosh
PICT mypict.pict.
.PP
    ra_pict \-g 2.2 mypict.hdr mypict.pict
.PP
Will convert the file using a gamma of 2.2.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rpict(1)
.SH BUGS
Does not yet do Macintosh PICT to Radiance PIC, as this PICT files
are a lot more complex than just one bit map. This is left as an
exercise for the reader :-)
.SH AUTHOR
Russell Street
