.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH RAD2MGF 1 5/15/95 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
rad2mgf - convert RADIANCE scene description to Materials and Geometry Format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rad2mgf
[
.B \-dU
]
[
.B input ..
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rad2mgf
converts one or more RADIANCE scene files
to the Materials and Geometry Format (MGF).
Input units are specified with the
.I \-mU
option, where
.I U
is one of 'm' (meters), 'c' (centimeters), 'f' (feet) or 'i'
(inches).
The assumed unit is meters, which is the required output unit for
MGF (thus the need to know).
If the input dimensions are in none of these units, then the user
should apply
.I xform(1)
with the
.I \-s
option to bring the units into line prior to translation.
.PP
The MGF material names and properties
for the surfaces will be those assigned in RADIANCE.
If a referenced material has not been defined, then its name will
be invoked in the MGF output without definition, and the description
will be incomplete.
.SH LIMITATIONS
Although MGF supports all of the geometric types and the most
common material types used in RADIANCE, there is currently no
support for advanced BRDF materials, patterns, textures or mixtures.
Also, the special types "source" and "antimatter" are not supported,
and all light source materials are converted to simple diffuse emitters
(except "illum" materials, which are converted to their alternates).
These primitives are reproduced as comments in the output and
must be replaced manually if necessary.
.PP
The RADIANCE "instance" and "mesh" types aretreated specially.
.I Rad2mgf
converts each instance or mesh to an MGF include statement,
using the corresponding
transformation and a file name derived from the octree or mesh name.
(The original octree/mesh suffix is replaced by ".mgf".)\0
For this to work, the user must separately create the referenced
MGF files from the original RADIANCE descriptions.
The description file names can usually be determined using the
.I getinfo(1)
command run on the octrees in question.
.SH EXAMPLE
To convert three RADIANCE files (in feet) to one MGF file:
.IP "" .2i
rad2mgf \-df file1.rad file2.rad file3.rad > scene.mgf
.PP
To translate a RADIANCE materials file to MGF:
.IP "" .2i
rad2mgf materials.rad > materials.mgf
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getinfo(1), ies2rad(1), mgf2meta(1), mgf2rad(1), obj2rad(1), oconv(1), xform(1)
.PP
MGF web site "http://radsite.lbl.gov/mgf/HOME.html"
