.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH RANIMOVE 1 1/30/03 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
ranimove - render a RADIANCE animation with motion
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ranimove
[
.B \-s
][
.B \-e
][
.B \-w
][
.B "\-f beg,end"
][
.B "\-n nprocs"
][
.B "\-t sec"
][
.B "\-d jnd"
]
.B rnmfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ranimove
is a program for progressive animation rendering.
Variables in the given
.I rnmfile
indicate input files, output file names,
and various other controls and options.
.PP
Normally, progress reports are written to the standard output, but the
.I \-s
option tells
.I ranimove
to do its work silently.
The
.I \-e
option tells
.I ranimove
to explicate all variables used for the animation, including
default values not specified in the input file, and print them on
the standard output.
The
.I \-w
option turns off warnings about multiply and misassigned variables and
non-fatal rendering problems.
.PP
Normally,
.I ranimove
will produce one animation frame for each view given in the specified
view file.
If the
.I \-f
option is specified, the animation will resume at the given frame, and
continue to the end of the sequence, or to the second frame if one is given
(separated from the first by a comma but no space).
.PP
The
.I \-n
option specifies the number of processes to use for rendering.
The default value is 1, which is appropriate for most machines
that have a single central processing unit (CPU).
If you are running on a machine with multiple CPUs, a larger
value up to the number of processors may be used
to improve rendering speed, depending on the system load.
.PP
Because
.I ranimove
renders each frame progressively, it needs some criteria for when
to proceed to the next frame in the animation.
The
.I \-t
option is used to specify the maximum number of seconds to spend
on any one frame.
The default value for this option is 60 seconds.
Additionally, the
.I \-d
option may be used to specify a termination
threshold in just-noticeable-differences.
If the error can be reduced below this number of JNDs
over the whole frame before the time allocation is spent,
.I ranimove
will then proceed to the next frame.
A value of 2.0 JNDs is the point at which 75% of the people will notice
a difference, and this is the level usually selected for such a
termination test.
There is no default value for this option, which means that rendering
will proceed until the time allocation is spent for each frame, regardless.
If
.I \-t
is set to 0,
.I ranimove
will spend as much time as it takes to reduce the
visible error below the value set by the
.I \-d
option.
.PP
.I Ranimove
renders each frame in three stages.
In the first stage, a low-quality image
is rendered using one ray sample per 16 pixels.
In the second stage, pixels from the previous frame are extrapolated to
their corresponding positions in
this one, based on the given camera and object movements.
A set of heuristics is applied
to prevent errors in specular highlights and shadows, avoiding
some of the errors typical with the
.I pinterp(1)
program.
In the third stage, additional high-quality samples are used to refine
important regions of the image that are judged to have visible errors.
This proceeds until the stopping criteria specified by the
.I \-t
and
.I -d
options are met,
when the frame is filtered and written to the designated picture file.
.PP
The chief differences between this program and
.I ranimate(1)
are that motion blur is computed for objects as well as camera movement,
and its progressive rendering allows better control over the tradeoff
between frame accuracy and rendering time.
Fewer controls are provided for managing the picture files produced by
.I ranimove,
and no facilities for distributed rendering are available other
than executing
.I ranimove
on different machines using the
.I \-f
option to manually partition the work.
.PP
Animation variable assignments appear one per line in
.I rnmfile.
The name of the variable is followed by an equals sign
('=') and its value(s).
The end of line may be escaped with a backslash ('\\'), though it is
not usually necessary since additional variable values may be given
in multiple assignments.
Variables that should have only one value are given in upper case.
Variables that may have multiple values are given in lower case.
Variables may be abbreviated by their first three letters.
Comments in
.I rnmfile
start with a pound sign ('#') and proceed to the end of line.
.PP
The animation variables, their interpretations and default values
are given below.
.TP 10n
.BR OCTREE
The name of the base octree file, which should be generated by the
.I oconv(1)
command using the
.I \-f
option.
There is no default value for this variable.
If no
.I RIF
variable is given, the octree must be specified.
.TP
.BR RIF
This variable specifies a
.I rad(1)
input file to use as a source of rendering options and other
variable settings.
If given,
.I ranimate
will execute
.I rad
and create an options file to control rendering parameters.
.I Ranimate
will also extract default settings for the common variables:
.I OCTREE,
.I RESOLUTION,
and
.I EXPOSURE.
Following the file name, overriding variable settings may be given,
which will be passed to
.I rad
on the command line.
Settings with spaces in them should be enclosed in quotes.
The execution of
.I rad
will also update the contents of the octree, if necessary.
There is no default value for this variable.
.TP
.BR move
This variable specifies an object (or objects) with a specific
motion and/or rendering priority.
Four value arguments are expected for each appearance of this variable.
The first is the name of a parent move object, or "void" if none.
If given, the object's transformation will be prepended to that
of its parent.
The second argument is the name of this object, which will be used
to name surfaces it contains, and as a parent identifier for any child
objects that reference it.
The third argument is the transformation string or file for this object.
If this argument is enclosed in quotes and begins with a hyphen
('-'), then it will be interpreted as a
static transform specification a la
.I xform(1).
Otherwise, the argument will be taken as the name of a file that contains
one such transform specification per line, corresponding to frames in the
animation.
A period ('.') may be given if no object transformation is desired.
The fourth argument is the name of a
.I RADIANCE
scene file (or files) to be given to
.I xform
for transformation.
If this argument begins with an exclamation point ('!'), then
it will be interpreted as a command rather than a file.
A final word corresponding to the frame number will be
appended to the command, and its output will be passed to
the input of
.I xform
for each frame.
An optional fifth argument
specifies the rendering priority for this object.
Values greater than 1.0 will result in preferential rendering of
this object over other portions of the image when it appears in a frame.
Values less than 1.0 will cause the rendering to neglect this object in
favor of other parts of the image.
A value of 3.0 can be interpreted as saying the viewer is three times more
likely to look at this object than the background.
A file may be given rather than a floating point value, and this file must
contain one floating point number per line, corresponding to priorities
for frames in the animation.
.TP
.BR VIEWFILE
This variable names a file from which
.I ranimove
may extract the view for each frame in the animation.
This file should contain one valid view per frame, starting with
frame 1 on line 1.
An exception is made for a view file with only a single view, which
is used for every frame of the animation.
In this case, the
.I END
variable must also be specified.
This variable is required, and there is no default value.
.TP
.BR END
The final frame number in the animation.
The default value is computed from the number of views in the given
.I VIEWFILE.
Normally, this variable will only be given if the view is static.
.TP
.BR EXPOSURE
This variable tells
.I ranimate
how to adjust the exposure for each frame.
As in
.I pfilt,
the exposure setting may be given either as a multiplier or as a
number of f\-stop adjustments (eg. +2 or \-1.5).
Alternatively, a file name may be given, which
.I ranimate
will interpret as having one exposure value per line per frame,
beginning with frame 1 at line 1.
(See also the
.I VIEWFILE
variable, above.)\0
There is no default value for this variable.
If it is not given, no exposure adjustments will be made.
.TP
.BR BASENAME
The base output file name for the final frames.
This string should contain a
.I printf(3)
style integer field to distinguish one frame number from another.
The final frames will use this name with a ".hdr" suffix.
The default value is "frame%03d".
.TP
.BR MBLUR
This variable specifies the fraction of a frame time that the shutter
is simulated as being open for motion blur.
Motion blur is computed by
.I ranimove
using image-based rendering methods in a rather crude fashion.
A much better result is achieved by setting
.I MBLUR=0
and using the
.I pmblur2(1)
command as a post-process, assigning the
.I ZNAME
and
.I MNAME
variables described below.
The default motion blur is 0.
.TP
.BR RATE
This variable specifies the animation frame rate, in frames per second.
This is needed to compute the animation error visibility.
The default value is 8.
.TP
.BR RESOLUTION
This variable specifies the desired final picture resolution.
If only a single number is given, this value will be used for both
the horizontal and vertical picture dimensions.
If two numbers are given, the first is the horizontal resolution and
the second is the vertical resolution.
If three numbers are given, the third is taken as the pixel aspect
ratio for the final picture (a real value).
If the pixel aspect ratio is zero, the exact dimensions given will
be those produced.
Otherwise, they will be used as a frame in which the final image
must fit.
The default value for this variable is 640.
.TP
.BR lowq
This variable may be used to specify rendering options
for the initial, low-quality ray samples.
It may be given either as a list of rendering parameter settings,
or as variable settings for the
.I rad
command, in which case the
.I RIF
variable must also be specified.
.TP
.BR highq
This variable may be used to specify rendering options
for the final, high-quality ray samples.
It may be given either as a list of rendering parameter settings,
or as variable settings for the
.I rad
command, in which case the
.I RIF
variable must also be specified.
.TP
.BR oconv
This variable may be used to specify special options for
.I oconv.
See the
.I oconv(1)
manual page for a list of valid options.
(The
.I \-f
option is specified by default.)\0
.TP
.BR ZNAME
The base file name for the depth buffer output frames.
This string should contain a
.I printf(3)
style integer field to distinguish one frame number from another.
The final frames will use this name with a ".zbf" suffix.
This is needed by the
.I pmblur2
command to compute a better motion blur.
There is no default setting for this variable.
.TP
.BR MNAME
The base file name for the motion vector output frames.
This string should contain a
.I printf(3)
style integer field to distinguish one frame number from another.
The final frames will use this name with a ".mvo" suffix.
This file is used together with the image and depth buffer by
.I pmblur2
to compute a better motion blur.
In this case, the
.I MBLUR
variable should be unset or zero.
The file will contain 3 16-bit unsigned values per pixel.
The first two are the x and y offsets to each pixel in the previous frame,
with an offset of 32768 being no movement.
The third value is 0 if the previous frame's pixel was on a
different object, and 32768 if it was on the same object.
There is no default setting for this variable.
.SH EXAMPLES
A minimal input file for
.I ranimove
might look like this:
.IP "" .3i
.nf
::::::::::
sample.rnm
::::::::::
# The rad input file for our static scene:
RIF= tutor.rif
# The view file containing one view per frame:
VIEWFILE= anim1.vf
# Our central character and its motion:
move= void myguy myguy.xf myguy.rad 2.0
.fi
.PP
Note that most of the variables are not set in this file.
If we only want to see what default values
.I ranimove
would use without actually executing anything, we can invoke it
thus:
.IP "" .2i
ranimove \-n 0 \-e sample.rnm
.PP
This will print the variables we have given as well as default
values
.I ranimove
has assigned for us.
.PP
Usually, we execute
.I ranimove
in the background, redirecting the standard output and standard
error to a file:
.IP "" .2i
ranimove sample.rnm >& sample.err &
.PP
If we decide that the default values
.I ranimove
has chosen for our variables are not all appropriate, we can add
some more assignments to the file:
.IP "" .3i
.nf
RES= 1024				# shoot for 1024x resolution
MBLUR= .25				# apply camera motion blur
RATE= 15				# 15 frames/second
EXP= anim1.exp				# adjust exposure according to file
lowq= QUAL=Low				# low quality ray sampling
highq= QUAL=Med				# high quality ray sampling
.fi
.PP
Note the use of abbreviation for variable names.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
fieldcomb(1), oconv(1), pfilt(1), pinterp(1), pmblur2(1), pvalue(1), rad(1),
ran2tiff(1), ranimate(1), rpict(1), xform(1)
