.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH RANIMATE 1 6/24/98 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
ranimate - compute a RADIANCE animation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ranimate
[
.B \-s
][
.B \-n
][
.B \-e
][
.B \-w
]
.B ranfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ranimate
is an executive program that reads the given
.I ranfile
and makes appropriate calls to
.I rad(1),
.I rpict(1),
.I pinterp(1),
and/or
.I pfilt(1)
to render an animation.
Variables in
.I ranfile
indicate input files, process servers (execution hosts), output
directories and file names, and various other controls and options.
.PP
Normally, commands are echoed to the standard output as they are
executed.
The
.I \-s
option tells
.I ranimate
to do its work silently.
The
.I \-n
option tells
.I ranimate
not to take any action (ie. not to actually execute any commands).
The
.I \-e
option tells
.I ranimate
to explicate all variables used for the animation, including
default values not specified in the input file, and print them on
the standard output.
.PP
The
.I \-w
option turns off warnings about multiply and misassigned variables.
.PP
Normally,
.I ranimate
will produce one animation frame for each view given in the specified
view file.
If an animation has ended or been killed in an incomplete state, however,
.I ranimate
will attempt to pick up where the earlier process left off.
If the process is still running, or was started on another machine,
.I ranimate
will report this information and exit.
.PP
Animation variable assignments appear one per line in
.I ranfile.
The name of the variable is followed by an equals sign
('=') and its value(s).
The end of line may be escaped with a backslash ('\\'), though it is
not usually necessary since additional variable values may be given
in multiple assignments.
Variables that should have only one value are given in upper case.
Variables that may have multiple values are given in lower case.
Variables may be abbreviated by their first three letters, except
for "host", which must have all four.
Comments in
.I ranfile
start with a pound sign ('#') and proceed to the end of line.
.PP
The animation variables, their interpretations and default values
are given below.
.TP 10n
.BR DIRECTORY
The name of the animation directory.
All temporary files generated during the animation will be placed in
this directory, which will be created by
.I ranimate
if it does not exist.
A file named "STATUS" will also be created there, and will contain current
information about the animation process.
This variable has no default value, and its setting is required.
.TP
.BR OCTREE
The name of the octree file for a static scene walk-through
animation.
There is no default value for this variable, and any
setting will be ignored if the
.I ANIMATE
variable is also set (see below).
.TP
.BR ANIMATE
The scene generation command for a dynamic animation.
This command, if given, will be executed with the frame number as the
final argument, and on its standard output it must produce
the complete octree for that frame.
Care must be taken that this command does not create any temporary files
that might collide with same-named files created by other
animation commands running in parallel.
Also, the command should produce no output to the standard error, unless
there is a fatal condition.
(I.e., switch all warnings off;
see the BUGS section, below.)\0
There is no default animation command, and either this variable or the
.I OCTREE
variable must be set.
.TP
.BR VIEWFILE
This variable names a file from which
.I ranimate
may extract the view for each frame in the animation.
This file should contain one valid view per frame, starting with
frame 1 on line 1, regardless of the setting of the
.I START
variable.
An exception is made for a view file with only a single view, which
is used for every frame of a dynamic scene animation.
This variable is required, and there is no default value.
.TP
.BR START
The initial frame number in this animation sequence.
The minimum value is 1, and if a later starting frame is given,
.I ranimate
assumes that the earlier frames are included in some other
.I ranfile,
which has been previously executed.
(See the
.I NEXTANIM
variable, below.)\0
The default value is 1.
.TP
.BR END
The final frame number in this sequence.
The minimum value is equal to the
.I START
frame,
and the default value is computed from the number of views in the
given
.I VIEWFILE.
.TP
.BR EXPOSURE
This variable tells
.I ranimate
how to adjust the exposure for each frame.
As in
.I pfilt,
the exposure setting may be given either as a multiplier or as a
number of f\-stop adjustments (eg. +2 or \-1.5).
Alternatively, a file name may be given, which
.I ranimate
will interpret as having one exposure value per line per frame,
beginning with frame 1 at line 1.
(See also the
.I VIEWFILE
variable, above.)\0
There is no default value for this variable.
If it is not given, an average level will be computed by
.I pfilt
for each frame.
.TP
.BR BASENAME
The base output file name for the final frames.
This string will be passed to the
.I \-o
and
.I \-z
options of rpict, along with appropriate suffixes,
and thus should contain a
.I printf(3)
style integer field to distinguish one frame number from another.
The final frames will use this name with a ".hdr" suffix.
The default value is the assigned
.I DIRECTORY
followed by "/frame%03d".
.TP
.BR host
A host to use for command execution.
This variable may be assigned a host name, followed by an optional
number of parallel processes, followed by an optional
directory (relative to the user's home directory on that machine),
followed by an alternate user name.
Multiple
.I host
assignments may appear.
It is not advisable to specify more than one process on a single-CPU
host, as this just tends to slow things down.
The default value is "localhost", which starts a single process in
the current directory of the local machine.
.TP
.BR RIF
This variable specifies a
.I rad
input file to use as a source of rendering options and other
variable settings.
If given,
.I ranimate
will execute
.I rad
and create an options file to later pass to
.I rpict
or
.I rtrace.
Besides prepending the
.I render
variable,
.I ranimate
will also extract default settings for the common variables:
.I OCTREE,
.I RESOLUTION,
.I EXPOSURE
and
.I pfilt.
Following the file name, overriding variable settings may be given,
which will be passed to
.I rad
on the command line.
Settings with spaces in them should be enclosed in quotes.
The execution of
.I rad
will also update the contents of the octree, if necessary.
There is no default value for this variable.
.TP
.BR DISKSPACE
Specify the amount of disk space (in megabytes) available on the
destination file system for temporary file storage.
.I Ranimate
will coordinate its batch operations based on this amount of storage,
assuming that there is either enough additional space for all the
final frames, or that the given
.I TRANSFER
command will move the finished frames to some other location (see
below).
The default value is 100 megabytes.
.TP
.BR ARCHIVE
After each batch rendering is finished and checked for completeness,
.I ranimate
will execute the given command, passing the names of all the
original pictures and z-buffer files generated by
.I rpict.
(The command is executed in the destination directory, and file names
will be simple.)\0
Normally, the archive command copies the original files to a tape device
or somewhere that they can be retrieved in the event of failure in
the frame interpolation stages.
After the archive command has successfully completed, the original
renderings are removed.
There is no default value for this variable, meaning that the
original unfiltered frames will simply be removed.
Note that the last one or two rendered frames may not be copied, archived
or removed in case there is a another sequence picking up where this
one left off.
.TP
.BR TRANSFER
The command to transfer the completed animation frames.
The shell changes to the destination directory and appends
the names of all the finished frames to this command
before it is executed.
Normally, the transfer command does something such as convert the
frames to another format and/or copy them to tape or some other
destination device before removing them.
The
.I fieldcomb(1)
script may be used to conveniently combine fields into frames for
field-based animations.
If this variable is not given, the final frames are left where they
are.
(See
.I BASENAME,
above.)\0
.TP
.BR RSH
The command to use instead of
.I ssh(1)
to execute commands remotely on another machine.
The arguments and behavior of this program must be identical to the UNIX
.I ssh
command, except that the
.I -l
option will always be used to specify an alternate user name rather than the
.I "user@host"
convention.
The
.I -l
option may or may not appear, but the
.I -n
option will always be used, and the expected starting directory will
be that of the remote user, just as with
.I ssh.
.TP
.BR NEXTANIM
This variable specifies the next
.I ranfile
to use after this sequence is completed.
This offers a convenient means to continue an animation that
requires different control options in different segments.
It is important in this case to correctly set the
.I START
and
.I END
variables in each
.I ranfile
so that the segments do not overlap frames.
.TP
.BR OVERSAMPLE
This variable sets the multiplier of the original image size
relative to the final size given by the
.I RESOLUTION
variable.
This determines the quality of anti-aliasing in the final frames.
A value of 1 means no anti-aliasing, and a value of 3 produces very
good anti-aliasing.
The default value is 2.
(A fractional value may be used for previews, causing low
resolution frames with large, blocky pixels to be produced.)\0
.TP
.BR INTERPOLATE
This variable sets the number of frames to interpolate between each
rendered frame in a static scene walk-through.
Z-buffers for each rendered frame will be generated by
.I rpict,
and
.I pinterp
will be called to perform the actual "tweening."
This results in a potentially large savings in rendering time, but
should be used with caution since certain information may be lost or
inaccurate, such as specular highlights and reflections, and objects
may even break apart if too few renderings are used to interpolate
too much motion.
The default value for this variable is 0, meaning no interpolation.
Interpolation is also switched off if the
.I ANIMATE
variable is specified.
.TP
.BR MBLUR
This variable specifies the fraction of a frame time that the shutter
is simulated as being open for motion blur.
A number of samples may be given as a second argument, which
controls the number of additional frames computed and averaged
together by
.I pinterp.
If this number is less than 2, then bluring is performed by
.I rpict
only, resulting in greater noise than the combination of
.I rpict
and
.I pinterp
used otherwise.
(The default value for number of samples is 5.)\0
The default fraction is 0, meaning no motion blurring.
This option does not currently work with the
.I ANIMATE
variable, since pinterp only works for static environments.
.TP
.BR DBLUR
This variable specifies the aperture diameter for depth-of-field blurring,
in world units.
A number of samples may be given as a second argument, which controls the
number of additional frames computed and averaged together by
.I pinterp.
If this number is less than 2, then blurring is performed by
.I rpict
only, resulting in greater noise than the combination of
.I rpict
and
.I pinterp
used otherwise.
(The default value for number of samples is 5.)\0
To simulate a particular camera's aperture, divide the focal length of
the lens by the f-number, then convert to the corresponding
world coordinate units.
For example, if you wish to simulate a 50mm lens at f/2.0 in
a scene modeled in meters, then you divide 50mm by 2.0 to get 25mm,
which corresponds to an effective aperture of 0.025 meters.
The default aperture is 0, meaning no depth-of-field blurring.
This option does not currently work with the
.I ANIMATE
variable, since pinterp only works for static environments.
.TP
.BR RTRACE
This boolean variable tells
.I ranimate
whether or not to employ
.I rtrace
during frame interpolation using the
.I \-fr
option to
.I pinterp.
If set to True, then the same rendering options and static octree
are passed to
.I rtrace
as are normally used by
.I rpict.
The default value is False.
Note that this variable only applies to static environment
walk-throughs (i.e., no
.I ANIMATE
command).
.TP
.BR RESOLUTION
This variable specifies the desired final picture resolution.
If only a single number is given, this value will be used for both
the horizontal and vertical picture dimensions.
If two numbers are given, the first is the horizontal resolution and
the second is the vertical resolution.
If three numbers are given, the third is taken as the pixel aspect
ratio for the final picture (a real value).
If the pixel aspect ratio is zero, the exact dimensions given will
be those produced.
Otherwise, they will be used as a frame in which the final image
must fit.
The default value for this variable is 640.
.TP
.BR render
This variable may be used to specify additional options to
.I rpict
or
.I rtrace.
These options will appear after the options set automatically by
.I rad,
and thus will override the default values.
.TP
.BR pinterp
This variable may be used to specify additional options to
.I pinterp,
which is used to interpolate frames for a static scene walk-through.
(See the
.I pinterp
man page, and the
.I INTERPOLATE
variable.)\0
Do not use this variable to set the
.I pinterp
.I \-fr
option, but use the
.I RTRACE
setting instead.
.TP
.BR pfilt
This variable may be used to specify additional options to
.I pfilt.
If this variable is given in the
.I ranfile,
then
.I pfilt
will always be used.
(Normally,
.I pfilt
is called only if
.I pinterp
is not needed or automatic exposure is required.)\0
See the
.I pfilt
manual page for details.
.SH EXAMPLES
A minimal input file for
.I ranimate
might look like this:
.IP "" .3i
.nf
::::::::::
sample.ran
::::::::::
# The rad input file for our static scene:
RIF= tutor.rif
# The spool directory:
DIRECTORY= anim1
# The view file containing one view per frame:
VIEWFILE= anim1.vf
# The amount of temporary disk space available:
DISKSPACE= 50	# megabytes
.fi
.PP
Note that most of the variables are not set in this file.
If we only want to see what default values
.I ranimate
would use without actually executing anything, we can invoke it
thus:
.IP "" .2i
ranimate \-n \-e sample.ran
.PP
This will print the variables we have given as well as default
values
.I ranimate
has assigned for us.
Also, we will see the list of commands that
.I ranimate
would have executed had the
.I \-n
option not been present.
.PP
Usually, we execute
.I ranimate
in the background, redirecting the standard output and standard
error to a file:
.IP "" .2i
ranimate sample.ran >& sample.err &
.PP
If we decide that the default values
.I ranimate
has chosen for our variables are not all appropriate, we can add
some more assignments to the file:
.IP "" .3i
.nf
host= rays 3 ~greg/obj/tutor ray 	# execute as ray on multi-host "rays"
host= thishost				# execute one copy on this host also
INTERP= 3				# render every fourth frame
RES= 1024				# shoot for 1024x resolution
MBLUR= .25				# apply camera motion blur
EXP= anim1.exp				# adjust exposure according to file
pfilt= \-r .9				# use Gaussian filtering
ARCHIVE= tar cf /dev/nrtape		# save original renderings to tape
.fi
.PP
Note the use of abbreviation for variable names.
.SH FILES
$(DIRECTORY)/STATUS	animation status file
$(DIRECTORY)/*		other temporary files
$(BASENAME).hdr		final animation frames
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH BUGS
Due to the difficulty of controlling processes on multiple execution
hosts, the
.I \-n
option of
.I ranimate
is not useful in the same way as
.I rad
for generating a script of executable commands to render the
sequence.
It may give an idea of the sequence of events, but certain temporary
files and so forth will not be in the correct state if the user
attempts to create a separate batch script.
.PP
If multiple processors are available on a given host and the
.I RTRACE
variable is set to True, then the
.I \-PP
option of
.I rtrace
should be employed, but it is not.
There is no easy way around this problem, but it has only minor
consequences in most cases.
(The
.I \-PP
option is used for
.I rpict,
however.)\0
.I
.PP
The current implementation of the remote shell does not return the
exit status of the remote process, which makes it difficult to
determine for sure if there has been a serious error or not.
Because of this,
.I ranimate
normally turns off warnings on all rendering processes, and takes
any output to standard error from a remote command as a sign that a
fatal error has occurred.
(This also precludes the use of the
.I \-t
option to report rendering progress.)\0
If the error was caused by a process server going down, the server
is removed from the active list and frame recovery takes place.
Otherwise,
.I ranimate
quits at that point in the animation.
.PP
The current execution environment, in particular the RAYPATH variable,
will not be passed during remote command execution, so it is necessary
to set whatever variables are important in the remote startup script
(e.g., ".cshrc" for the C-shell).
This requirement may be circumvented by substituting the
.I on(1)
command for
.I ssh(1)
using the
.I RSH
control variable, or by writing a custom remote execution script.
.PP
If a different remote user name is used,
.I ranimate
first attempts to change to the original user's directory with a
command of the form
.I "cd \~uname".
This works under
.I csh(1),
but may fail under other shells such as
.I sh(1).
.PP
If multiple hosts with different floating point formats are used,
.I pinterp
will fail because the Z-buffer files will be inconsistent.
(Recall that
.I pinterp
is called if INTERPOLATE > 0 and/or MBLUR is assigned.)\0
Since most modern machines use IEEE floating point, this is not
usually a problem, but it is something to keep in mind.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
fieldcomb(1), pfilt(1), pinterp(1), pmblur(1), rad(1),
ran2tiff(1), ranimove(1), rpict(1), ssh(1), rtrace(1)
