.\" RCSid "$Id: rcode_ident.1,v 1.4 2019/08/26 19:23:51 greg Exp $"
.TH RCODE_IDENT 1 7/19/2019 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
rcode_ident - store identifiers in an indexed map and retrieve from same
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rcode_ident
[
.I "-8 | -16 | -24"
][
.B \-h
][
.B \-tS
][
.B "-x xr -y yr"
]
[
input.txt
[output.idx]
]
.br
.B "rcode_ident -r"
[
.B \-i
][
.B \-u
][
.B \-h
][
.B \-H
][
.B \-l
][
.B \-n
][
.B \-tS
]
[
input.idx
[output.txt]
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rcode_ident
Takes a list of ASCII identifiers on the input and encodes them
as a 16-bit index to a table appended to the output.
This default index size can hold up to 65 thousand unique IDs,
which is suitable for most applications.
The
.I \-8
option may be used to specify an 8-bit index, which saves space
if 256 or fewer unique identifiers appear on the input.
The
.I \-24
option creates a 24-bit index that can record over 16 million
unique identifiers.
.PP
Identifiers are separated by newlines by default, but any single-character
separator may be given with the
.I \-tS
option.
Note there is no space between this option and its argument.
Leading and trailing white space is eliminated from each identifier,
and the maximum ID length is 255 characters.
.PP
Input is taken from the first named file, or standard input if no
files are given.
Output is sent to the second named file, or standard output if none.
.PP
The
.I \-h
option tells
.I rcode_ident
not to expect an information header on its input.
The
.I \-x
and
.I \-y
options give the horizontal and vertical map dimensions, respectively.
If these are not specified, then a resolution string must be
included on the header, as produced by
.I rtrace(1)
when both resolutions are specified.
.PP
The second form applies the
.I \-r
option to read an indexed id file and produce the original
identifiers for each pixel position on the output.
The 
.I \-h
and
.I \-H
options may be used to leave off the header and resolution
string, respectively.
The
.I \-tS
option specifies an alternate ID separator instead of the default newline.
The
.I \-l
option tells
.I rcode_ident
to list identifiers following the header information (if present).
The
.I \-n
option prints identifier table indexes rather than the strings themselves.
Indexing starts from 0 for the first table entry.
.PP
When decoding, the
.I \-i
option tells
.I rcode_ident
to produce an identifier for each integer input pair specifying
the horizontal and vertical coordinates of a particular pixel,
where x is measured from 0 on the left and y from 0 at the bottom
in the standard orientation.
Note that
.I \-i
implies that an indexed ID file is explicitly given on the command
line, since the pixel coordinates are read from the standard input.
If the
.I \-u
option is also given, output will be flushed after each identifier
.SH EXAMPLES
To store modifier IDs out of rtrace:
.IP "" .2i
rtrace -ffa < rays.flt -x 512 -y 400 -om octree | rcode_ident > mods.idx
.PP
To query specific modifiers using ximage with the 't' command:
.IP "" .2i
ximage -op render.hdr | rcode_ident -i -r mods.idx
.PP
To only print out the list of unique identifiers:
.IP "" .2i
rcode_ident -r -h -H -i -l mods.idx < /dev/null
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rcalc(1), rcode_depth(1), rcode_norm(1), rcode2bmp(1),
rlam(1), rsplit(1), rtpict(1)
