.\" RCSid "$Id: rcode_norm.1,v 1.2 2019/07/26 01:32:33 greg Exp $"
.TH RCODE_NORM 1 7/19/2019 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
rcode_norm - encode/decode 32-bit surface normal map
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rcode_norm
[
.B \-h[io]
][
.B \-H[io]
][
.B \-f[afd]
]
[
input
[output.nrm]
]
.br
.B "rcode_norm -r"
[
.B \-i
][
.B \-u
][
.B \-h[io]
][
.B \-H[io]
][
.B \-f[afd]
]
[
input.nrm
[output]
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rcode_norm
reads a map of normaled direction vectors
and encodes them in an efficient 32-bit/pixel format for storage.
Input is taken from the first named file, or standard input if no
files are given.
Output is sent to the second named file, or standard output if none.
.PP
The
.I \-hi
option tells
.I rcode_norm
not to expect an information header on its input.
The
.I \-ho
option tells
.I rcode_norm
not to produce an information header on its output.
Specifying
.I \-h
turns both input and output headers off.
Similarly, the
.I \-Hi
option says not to expect an image resolution string on input, the
.I \-Ho
option says not to produce one on output, and
.I \-H
applies both.
.PP
The default input format is ASCII (user-readable) real triplets,
corresponding to the
.I \-fa
option.
The
.I \-ff
option tells
.I rcode_norm
to expect three binary, 32-bit floating-point values per
normal on its input, instead.
The
.I \-fd
option tells it to expect 64-bit/component vectors.
.PP
The second form applies the
.I \-r
option to perform a reverse conversion, decoding 32-bit normal directions
on the input and producing one of the above formats on output.
The 
.I \-h
and
.I \-H
options have the same behavior as before.
.PP
When decoding, the
.I \-i
option tells
.I rcode_norm
to produce one depth or world point
for each integer input pair specifying
the horizontal and vertical coordinates of a particular pixel,
where x is measured from 0 on the left and y from 0 at the bottom
in the standard orientation.
Note that
.I \-i
implies that an encoded normal file is explicitly given on the command
line, since the pixel coordinates are read from the standard input.
Also, the
.I \-H
option is not supported with
.I \-i,
since the map dimensions are required on the
input and not copied to the output.
If the
.I \-u
option is also given, output will be flushed after each normal.
.SH EXAMPLES
To store float surface normals out of rtrace:
.IP "" .2i
rtrace -ff < rays.flt -x 512 -y 400 -oN octree | rcode_norm -ff > norms.nrm
.PP
To query specific normals using ximage with the 't' command:
.IP "" .2i
ximage -op render.hdr | rcode_norm -i -r norms.nrm
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rcalc(1), rcode_depth(1), rcode_ident(1), rcode2bmp(1),
rlam(1), rsplit(1), rtpict(1)
