.TH RCODE2BMP 1 7/25/2019 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
rcode2bmp - convert identifier, depth, and normal maps to BMP images
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rcode2bmp
[
.B "\-x xres \-y yres"
]
.B input1.typ
[
.B "input2.typ .."
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ra_bmp
converts each input map to a suitable visualization as a BMP image.
Supported types include Radiance pictures, depth maps produced by
.I rcode_depth(1),
identifier maps from
.I rcode_ident(1),
and surface normal maps from
.I rcode_norm(1).
Each input file is identified by the FORMAT string it its header,
and if it belongs to one of the supported types, a new file with the
same name will be created with its suffix replaced by ".bmp".
If a previous BMP file exists with the same name, it will be overwritten.
.PP
Radiance pictures are tone-mapped as if calling:
.IP "" .2i
ra_bmp -e auto file.hdr file.bmp
.PP
If the
.I \-x
and
.I \-y
options are given, these will be used as the maximum output image dimensions,
and this holds for all input types.
.PP
Depth maps from
.I rcode_depth
are processed using
.I falsecolor(1)
with an appropriate scale and label.
.PP
Identifier maps from
.I rcode_ident
are assigned a random color for each identifier.
.PP
Surface normal maps are processed using an HSV (hue, saturation, value)
color space that assigns normal orientation
to a hue angle, and saturation runs from 0 when the normal is aligned to
the view origin, to maximum saturation at tangential edges.
Back-facing normals will be darker -- a normal in the direction opposite
to the viewer being pure black.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
falsecolor(1), ra_bmp(1), rcode_depth(1), rcode_ident(1), rcode_norm(1),
rtpict(1)
