.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH REPLMARKS 1 3/24/94 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
replmarks - replace triangular markers in a RADIANCE scene description
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B replmarks
[
.B \-e
][
.B "\-m newmod"
][
.B "\-s scale"
]
{
.B "\-x objfile"
|
.B "\-i octree"
|
.B "\-I mesh"
}
.B "modname .."
[
.B "file .."
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Replmarks
replaces triangular markers identified by the modifier
.I modname
in each scene description
.I file
and writes the result to the standard output.
The
.I \-x
option indicates that each marker should be replaced by an appropriate
.I xform(1)
command on
.I objfile.
The
.I \-i
option indicates that each marker should be replaced by an instance of
.I octree.
The
.I \-I
option indicates that each marker should be replaced by an instance of
the Radiance mesh
.I mesh.
One of these three options must appear on the command line, along with
.I modname,
the modifier used by markers in the file.
.PP
Multiple modifiers may be given, as long as each one is preceded
by its own
.I \-x
or
.I \-i
option.
.PP
The transformation for each marker is determined by its location
and orientation.
A marker should be a right triangle pointing like a half-arrow in
the direction of the transformed x-axis, x'.
The longest side is the hypoteneuse, the second longest side is
the x'-axis, and the third longest side indicates the direction of
the y'-axis.
Any additional sides will be ignored (ie. a quadrilateral may be
used instead of a triangle if the extra side is small).
The z'-axis is determined by the cross product of the x' and y'
axes, and the origin is the common vertex between x' and y'.
.PP
The size of the marker is ignored unless the
.I \-s
option is used, where
.I scale
is a multiplier for the x'-axis length to indicate the total scale
factor.
For example, a
.I scale
value of 5 with a marker length of .5 would result in a total
scale factor of 2.5 to be used in the transformation.
.PP
The
.I \-e
option causes commands in the file to be expanded, and
is required to replace markers from commands in the input file.
Even with this option,
.I replmarks
will not examine objects for markers.
Specifically, an object included by
.I replmarks
as a result of a
.I \-x
expansion will be transferred verbatim, without regard
to any surfaces therein that might have been considered
as marks if they were on the main input.
.PP
The
.I \-m
option causes all replaced objects to be given the modifier
.I newmod.
Otherwise, the new object surfaces will use their originally defined
modifiers.
A different replacement modifier may be given for each marker type.
The marker modifier name itself is only used to identify markers,
and will not appear in the output in any form.
.PP
If no input
.I file
is given, the standard input is read.
.SH EXAMPLE
To replace all polygons with the modifier ``knobs'' in the file input
with a transformed ``knob.rad'' and write the result to output:
.IP "" .2i
replmarks \-x knob.rad knobs input > output
.PP
To use instances of ``tree.oct'' with scaling set to three times the
tree marker length:
.IP "" .2i
replmarks \-s 3 \-i tree.oct tree input > output
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
arch2rad(1), ies2rad(1), xform(1)
