.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH RHCOPY 1 1/15/99 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
rhcopy - copy ray information into a holodeck
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rhcopy
.B dest_holo
[
.B \-u
][
.B \-d
]
.B "\-h src_holo .."
.br
or
.br
.B rhcopy
.B dest_holo
[
.B \-u
][
.B \-d
]
.B "\-p src_pic src_zbf .."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rhcopy
adds ray sample data to the existing holodeck
.I dest_holo.
In the first form, the ray samples are taken from one or more holodeck files
given after the
.I \-h
option.
In the second form, the ray samples are taken from one or more RADIANCE
picture files and their depth buffers, which must be paired on the
command line after the
.I \-p
option.
.PP
The
.I \-u
option turns on duplicate ray checking.
In some cases, the same ray may already exist in the destination holodeck,
and it would be redundant to add it.
By default,
.I rhcopy
does not check for duplicates, because it takes extra time, and in many
invocations is not necessary, as when copying into an empty holodeck.
.PP
The
.I \-d
option turns off depth checking.
Normally,
.I rhcopy
checks the OBSTRUCTIONS variable of the destination holodeck, and if it is
set to True, makes sure that all contributing rays start outside each
section.
If OBSTRUCTIONS is set to False, then
.I rhcopy
makes sure that any contributing rays end outside each section.
If OBSTRUCTIONS is not set, then this option has no effect.
(See the
.I rholo(1)
man page for a definition of the OBSTRUCTIONS variable.)\0
.PP
.I Rcopy
cannot be used to create a holodeck -- use
.I rholo
for this purpose.
For example, to create an empty holodeck, run
.I rholo
without either the
.I \-n
or
.I \-o
option.
Whatever variables are set by
.I rholo
when the new holodeck is created
are the ones that will have effect when later rendering or viewing.
Since the ray sample data may be taken from any source,
.I rholo
and
.I rhcopy
may be used together to change certain unalterable holodeck parameters,
such as the section grid geometry.
.SH EXAMPLE
To take data from an existing holodeck after changing the section grid:
.IP "" .2i
rholo new.hdk new.hif
.br
rhcopy new.hdk \-h old.hdk
.PP
To add ray samples from two pictures to the new holodeck:
.IP "" .2i
rhcopy new.hdk \-p view1.hdr view1.zbf view2.hdr view2.zbf
.SH NOTES
.I Rhcopy
attempts to place the beams in the holodeck in a good
order for quick access, but if the data comes from multiple sources,
the results may not be optimal.
For large holodecks, it is sometimes useful to run the
.I rhoptimize(1)
program once all runs of
.I rhcopy
are through.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward Larson
.SH ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getinfo(1), pfilt(1), psign(1), rhinfo(1), rholo(1), rhoptimize(1), rpict(1)
