.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH RHOPTIMIZE 1 1/25/99 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
rhoptimize - optimize beam locations in holodeck file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rhoptimize
[
.B \-u
]
.B src_holo
[
.B dest_holo
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rhoptimize
optimizes beam positions and eliminates fragment waste in the holodeck file
.I src_holo,
writing the result to
.I dest_holo,
or back into
.I src_holo
if only one argument is given.
This may improve rendering speed on large holodecks, which tend to have
widely dispersed beam positions that cause delays due to long file seeks.
It may also reduce the size of the file, since large holodecks become
fragmented as they fill up with new ray samples.
(Use the
.I rhinfo(1)
program to determine holodeck file fragmentation.)
The
.I \-u
option adds a check to make sure that each ray sample is unique, i.e., the same sample
is never given twice.
This check is usually unnecessary, but may eliminate redundant samples from some
holodeck files.
.SH EXAMPLE
To optimize the beam order in old.hdk and write the results to new.hdk:
.IP "" .2i
rhoptimize old.hdk new.hdk
.PP
To optimize beam order in scene.hdk:
.IP "" .2i
rhoptimize scene.hdk
.SH NOTES
If
.I rhoptimize
is given only one file argument,
it creates a temporary file in the same directory, and moves it onto
the original file once it has successfully completed its operation.
If the operation fails for some reason, the temporary file is removed
and the original holodeck is left unchanged.
.PP
This program generally takes several minutes to run and offers no progress
reports.
.SH FILES
rho????.hdk	temporary file to hold new holodeck
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward Larson
.SH ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Silicon Graphics, Inc.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getinfo(1), pfilt(1), psign(1), rhcopy(1), rhinfo(1), rholo(1), rpict(1)
