.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH RPIECE 1 10/1/98 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
rpiece - render pieces of a RADIANCE picture
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rpiece
[
.B \-v
][
.B "\-x xres"
][
.B "\-y yres"
][
.B "\-X xdiv"
][
.B "\-Y ydiv"
][
.B "\-F|R syncfile"
][
.B "\-T timelim"
]
[
.B $EVAR
]
[
.B @file
]
[
rpict options
]
.B "\-o picture"
.B octree
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rpiece
renders a RADIANCE picture a piece at a time, calling
.I rpict(1)
to do the actual work.
This is useful for running multiple
.I rpict
processes on cooperating machines to render a single picture,
which is a shared file specified with the
.I \-o
option.
The overall picture dimensions will be
.I xres
by
.I yres
(or smaller, depending on the
.I \-pa
option and other view options), and the picture will be rendered in
.I xdiv
by
.I ydiv
pieces.
.PP
There are two basic methods for telling
.I rpiece
which piece(s) of a picture to render.
The explicit method is to write on the standard input the
.I X
and
.I Y
position of the desired piece(s), where
.I X
runs from zero to
.I xdiv\-\1
and
.I Y
runs from zero to
.I ydiv\-\1.
(The lower left piece of a picture corresponds to (0,0) in this
system.)\0
Alternatively, the implicit specification method uses a
synchronization file to
determine which piece is to be rendered next.
Specified with the
.I \-F
option,
.I syncfile
initially contains the values for
.I xdiv
and
.I ydiv,
so the
.I \-X
and
.I \-Y
options are unnecessary.
(However, they are used if
.I syncfile
does not exist.)\0
The first
.I rpiece
process puts a lock on
.I syncfile
and modifies its contents before
starting work on the first piece of the image.
It writes the
.I X
and
.I Y
position of the piece it will work on, so the next
.I rpiece
process to modify
.I syncfile
will start on the next piece.
(When it finishes with its piece, it appends the index to the end of
.I syncfile.)
This procedure continues until all the pieces are done, at which point all
of the
.I rpiece
processes will terminate.
.PP
The
.I \-R
option may be used instead of
.I \-F
if some of the pieces were not properly finished by previous (killed)
runs of
.I rpiece.
This option should be used by at most one
.I rpiece
process, which must be started first and with
.I "no other rpiece processes running"
or else it will rerender the same pieces other processes have begun.
Once the recover process is started, you may start other
.I rpiece
processes using the
.I \-F
option to run simultaneously.
If some processes die during execution, leaving one or more half-finished
pieces in the picture even though the other processes think the
work is done, you may run a single
.I rpiece
with the
.I \-R
option by itself to repair the holes.
.PP
The
.I \-v
flag switches on verbose mode, where
.I rpiece
reports to the standard output after each piece begins and
after each piece is finished.
.PP
Options may be given on the command line and/or read from the
environment and/or read from a file.
A command argument beginning with a dollar sign ('$') is immediately
replaced by the contents of the given environment variable.
A command argument beginning with an at sign ('@') is immediately
replaced by the contents of the given file.
.SH EXAMPLE
First
.I rpiece
process is started on the machine "goober":
.IP "" .2i
goober% echo 1 8 > syncfile
.br
goober% echo \-F syncfile \-x 1024 \-y 1024 \-vf view \-o picture octree > args
.br
goober% rpiece @args &
.PP
Second
.I rpiece
processes is started on the machine "sucker":
.IP "" .2i
sucker% rpiece @args &
.SH NOTES
Due to NFS file buffering, the network lock manager is employed to
guarantee consistency in the output file even though non-overlapping
writes are used.
This would tend to slow the process down if
.I rpiece
were to wait for this I/O to complete before starting on the next
piece, so
.I rpiece
forks separate processes to hang around waiting for I/O completion.
The number of processes thus designated is set by the MAXFORK macro
in the program (compiled in the src/util directory).
If the fork call is slow on a system, it may actually be better to
set MAXFORK to zero.
In other cases, the network lock manager may be so slow that this
value should be increased to get the best utilization.
.PP
The output picture is not run-length encoded, and can be quite
large.
The approximate size (in kilobytes) can be computed by the simple
formula:
.IP "" .2i
filesize = xres*yres/256
.PP
Make sure that there is enough space on the filesystem to hold the
entire picture before beginning.
Once the picture is finished, the
.I ra_rgbe(1)
program with the \-r option may be used to convert to a run\-length
encoded picture for more efficient storage, although
.I pfilt(1)
or any of the other Radiance picture filters will do the same
thing.
.PP
The ALRM signal may be used to gracefully terminate an
.I rpiece
process after it finishes the current piece.
This permits other currently running or subsequently started
.I rpiece
process(es) to continue rendering the picture without loss.
The
.I \-T
option will send the ALRM signal to
.I rpiece
after the specified number of (decimal) hours.
This is the best way to force a time limit on the computation,
since information will not be lost, though the process may continue
for some time afterwards to finish its current piece.
.SH BUGS
This program may not work on some systems whose NFS lock manager is
unreliable.
In particular, some System V derivative UNIX systems often have
problems with the network lock manager.
If the output is scrambled or rpict aborts with some ambient file
related problem, you should just remove the ambient file and go
back to normal rendering.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getinfo(1), pfilt(1), ra_rgbe(1), rpict(1), ximage(1)
