.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH TMESH2RAD 1 3/18/96 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
tmesh2rad - convert a triangular mesh to a RADIANCE scene description
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tmesh2rad
[
.B "\-o obj"
][
.B "\-m mat"
][
.B "\-p pat"
]
[
.B input ..
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Tmesh2rad
converts one or more triangle-mesh files to a RADIANCE scene description.
The
.I \-o
option may be used to assign a default object name.
The single letter "T" is used if no name is given on the command
line or in the file.
The
.I \-m
option may be used to assign a default material name.
The non-material "void" is used as a default if none is given on the
command line or in the file.
The
.I \-p
option may be used to assign a default picture for a surface
pattern.
If none is given on the command line or in the file, the surface
will not have an associated pattern.
.SH "FILE FORMAT"
A triangle-mesh is a free-format ASCII file
composed of the following eight primitive
types.
Each primitive is begun with a single, white-space-delimited letter:
.TP 10n
.BI # \ Comment
Whatever follows up until the end of line is passed as a comment
to the output.
Note that there must be at least one space or tab
following the pound-sign.
.TP
.BI o \ name
The white-space-delimited string
.I name
is used as a prefix for all following output triangles.
.TP
.BI m \ material
The white-space-delimited string
.I material
is used as the modifier name for all following output triangles.
.TP
.BI p \ picture
The white-space-delimited string
.I picture
is used as the name of the RADIANCE picture file
to be used as a pattern for
all following output triangles with properly defined vertices.
(See
.I i
primitive below.)\0
.TP
.BI v " id x y z"
Defines the vertex
.I id
with 3-dimensional coordinates
.I "x, y"
and
.I z.
The identifier,
.I id
must be some small, non-negative integer value.
If the same integer is used for a later vertex definition,
this definition will be lost, though any triangles using the
vertex prior to its redefinition will be unaffected.
.TP
.BI n " nx ny nz"
Defines a surface normal vector with the 3-dimensional components
.I "nx, ny"
and
.I nz.
This vector will be associated with the most recently defined
vertex, and is often placed on the same line as the vertex
definition for clarity.
The vector need not be normalized.
.TP
.BI i " u v"
Defines a picture index for the most recently defined vertex.
The
.I u
value will be used to lookup the horizontal pixel coordinate
in the currently defined picture.
The
.I v
value will be used to lookup the vertical pixel coordinate.
(See the RADIANCE reference manual for details on picture coordinate
values.)\0
As with associated surface normals, picture indices are interpolated
using barycentric coordinates based on the triangle vertices.
If these coordinates are calculated correctly, this
should result in a smooth mapping of a pattern onto the
surface mesh.
.TP
.BI t " id1 id2 id3"
Create a triangle connecting the three vertices identified by
.I "id1, id2"
and
.I id3.
The right-hand rule is used to determine the default surface
normal orientation, and this should not be too far from the
associated vertex normals (if any).
All three vertices must have an associated normal if the triangle
is to be smoothed.
If a picture file is defined and all three vertices have pattern
indices associated with them, then this picture will be used as a
pattern to modify the triangle's color.
.PP
We realize there are many similar
T-mesh file formats in existence, and that it would have been just
as easy to support one of these formats directly.
The disadvantage to supporting an existing format is that conversion
from other formats might prove difficult.
It was our hope to provide a "greatest common multiple" format that
would support all similar T-mesh formats, rather than supporting
WaveFront's .obj format (for example) and being unable to associate
a pattern with an object.
Converting from other formats should be relatively straightforward.
In many cases, an
.I "awk(1), rcalc(1)"
or even a
.I sed(1)
script should be sufficient.
.SH EXAMPLE
Here is an example T-mesh file:
.sp
.RS
.nf
# Our object name:
o test_object
# Our material:
m puce
# Our vertices:
v 1	10	15	5
v 2	10	\-15	5
v 3	0	\-15	0
v 4	\-10	15	\-5
# Two triangles joined together:
t 1 2 3
t 2 3 4
.fi
.RE
.sp
Which generates the following output:
.sp
.RS
.nf
## T-mesh read from: <stdin>

# Our material:

# Our vertices:

# Two triangles joined together:

puce polygon test_object.1
0
0
9
                10                 15                  5
                10                \-15                  5
                 0                \-15                  0

puce polygon test_object.2
0
0
9
                10                \-15                  5
                 0                \-15                  0
               \-10                 15                 \-5
.fi
.RE
.sp
.PP
Here is another example:
.sp
.RS
.nf
# A partial cylinder:
m BluePlastic
v 1 \-14.673 \-3.119    50 n \-0.95677 \-0.203374 1.17936e\-10
v 2 \-12.136 \-8.817   \-50 n \-0.791363 \-0.574922 4.84915e\-10
v 3 \-12.136 \-8.817    50 n \-0.791363 \-0.574922 4.84915e\-10
t 1 2 3
m OrangePlastic
v 1 \-7.501 \-12.991    50 n \-0.549094 \-0.812427 \-1.45812e\-09
v 2 \-12.136 \-8.817    50 n \-0.791363 \-0.574922 4.84915e\-10
v 3 \-12.136 \-8.817   \-50 n \-0.791363 \-0.574922 4.84915e\-10
t 1 2 3
m BluePlastic
v 1 \-1.568 \-14.918    50 n \-0.171094 \-0.965568 \-5.69788e\-09
v 2 \-7.501 \-12.991    50 n \-0.549094 \-0.812427 \-1.45812e\-09
v 3 \-7.501 \-12.991   \-50 n \-0.429001 \-0.881759 \-3.6502e\-09
t 1 2 3
.fi
.RE
.sp
Note that the same three vertices were used repeatedly, and
intermingled with the triangle definitions.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH BUGS
Triangle smoothing doesn't work very well for glass or trans
material types in Radiance, since textures cause distorted
transmission through these materials.
It is best to use the dielectric material type if smooth
transmission is desired.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
arch2rad(1), awk(1), ies2rad(1), thf2rad(1),
oconv(1), rcalc(1), sed(1), xform(1)
