.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH TRAD 1 1/24/96 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
trad - graphical user interface to Radiance rad(1) program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B trad
[
.B rfile
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Trad
is a graphical user interface to
.I rad(1),
which controls the operation of the basic Radiance scene compiling,
rendering and picture filtering programs.
Trad also includes links to a few utilities for displaying and
converting results, but most of what it does can be done by editing
a small text file, called the "rad input file".
Scene creation still requires the use of a text or graphical editor,
or translation from some external CAD format.
.PP
.I Trad
is based on the Tcl/Tk
.I wish(1)
"windowing shell" written by John Ousterhout.
(See below for instructions on installing this package if you do not
have it already.)\0
.PP
The
.I trad
interface divides the rendering problem into seven screens:
File, Scene, Zone, Views, Options, Action and Results.
The File screen is used to load and save rad input files
(a.k.a. project files).
The Scene screen is used to name the Radiance input files associated
with a particular project.
The Zone screen is used to assign
.I rad
variables specific to the section of the model being rendered.
The Views screen is used to define specific views to be rendered and
set the picture file names and dimensions.
The Options screen is used to adjust rendering quality and other
parameters.
The Action screen is used to initiate interactive and batch
renderings.
The Results screen is used to display, convert and print the
rendered Radiance pictures.
.PP
If
.I trad
is called with no rad input file name on the command line, it will
start with the File screen and you must enter a valid project file
before you will be allowed to continue.
If
.I rfile
is given, then
.I trad
attempts to open this file.
If no such file exists,
.I trad
assumes you are creating a new file by this name and goes to the
Scene screen so you may identify the appropriate Radiance input files.
If the file exists but not all renderings have been finished,
.I trad
goes first to the Action screen, assuming you will want to do
something.
If the file exists and all renderings have completed and are
up-to-date,
.I trad
goes to the Results screen so that you may examine the final
pictures.
.PP
.I Trad
includes an extensive help facility, which may be accessed either by
pressing the "HELP" button and searching through the category and
topic menus, or by holding the Control key and
pressing the left mouse button on the mysterious
widget (i.e. the button, entry window, or list box you are curious
about).
.SH "INSTALLING TCL/TK"
The Tcl/Tk package is available by anonymous ftp from
ftp.smli.com (204.153.12.45) in the /pub/tcl directory.
(Tcl stands for "Tool Command Language," and is pronounced
"tickle".)
.I Trad
is based on Tk release 4.0, which in turn is based on Tcl release 7.4.
Although
.I trad
uses only the
.I wish
program from this package,
.I wish
itself depends on
additional Tcl and Tk libraries, and the two toolkits must be
compiled one after the other.
.PP
To compile the Tcl/Tk package, download the files "tcl7.4.tar.Z" and
"tk4.0.tar.Z" and uncompress and untar them.
Then, follow the instructions in the README file in the tcl7.4/
directory to configure the Makefile for your system and install the
software.
(Usually, it is best to do this as root or have it done by your
system administrator if you do not have root privileges.)\0
Then, do the same in the tk4.0/ directory.
.PP
.I Trad
should run without modification once this is done correctly.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.br
.I wish
and Tcl/Tk language by John Ousterhout
.SH "SEE ALSO"
oconv(1), pfilt(1), rad(1), rpict(1), rvu(1), wish(1), ximage(1)
