.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH XFORM 1 6/4/99 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
xform - transform a RADIANCE scene description
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xform
[
.B \-c
][
.B \-I
][
.B "\-n name"
][
.B "\-m newmod"
][
.B "\-f argfile"
][
.B xf0
][
.B "\-a n1 xf1 .."
][
.B "\-i 1 xff"
]
.B "file .."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Xform
transforms each scene description
.I file
according to the options given.
If no
.I file
is specified, the standard input is read.
The
.I \-c
option causes commands in the input not to be expanded.
The default is to execute all in line commands.
(See note below about file names.)\0
The
.I \-n
option causes all identifiers to be prefixed with
.I name.
The
.I \-m
option causes all surfaces to be given the modifier
.I newmod.
The
.I \-I
option causes all surfaces to be inverted, reversing their
surface normal orientations.
These options are followed by the transformation options,
which are described below.
.PP
The
.I \-f
option causes the
.I xform
command line to be constructed from the given file,
by inserting each line of the file at the
current point in the command argument list.
Each line in the file will result in a logically separate invocation of
.I xform,
and may contain any valid
.I xform
arguments, including nested
.I \-f
options.
This is a convenient way to specify multiple copies of an object that
do not fit a regular array pattern, without having to actually execute
.I xform
many times.
Separate scene files may be specified this way as well, but remember
that the constructed command line must fit the format of initial options
.I "(-n, -m, -c, -I)"
followed by the transform then the scene files.
No initial options may appear after the first transform option, and
no transform options will be understood after the first named file.
In the special case where the argument to the
.I \-f
option is a hyphen ('-'),
.I xform
will take its arguments from the standard input.
Note that
.I xform
cannot simultaneously take its scene information from the standard input
if the option is used in this way.
Competely empty lines and lines beginning with a pound sign ('#') will be
silently ignored.
Beginning "!xform" or "xform" command names will also be ignored.
.PP
If one or more scene files are given on the command line,
.I xform
will search the RADIANCE library directories for each file.
(No search takes place if a file name begins with a '.', '/' or '~'
character.)\0
Unless the
.I \-c
option is present,
.I xform
will also change to that file's directory before loading it.
Thus, any commands executed within that file will happen in that
file's directory, which simplifies object hierarchy construction.
.PP
The transformation consists of a sequence of operations which
are executed in the order they appear.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 10n
.BI -t " x y z"
Translate the scene along the vector
.I "x y z".
.TP
.BI -rx \ degrees
Rotate the scene
.I degrees
about the x axis.
A positive rotation corresponds to counter-clockwise
when looking down the axis.
.TP
.BI -ry \ degrees
Rotate the scene
.I degrees
about the y axis.
.TP
.BI -rz \ degrees
Rotate the scene
.I degrees
about the z axis.
.TP
.BI -s \ factor
Scale the scene by
.I factor.
.TP
.BR \-mx
Mirror the scene about the yz plane.
.TP
.BR \-my
Mirror the scene about the xz plane.
.TP
.BR \-mz
Mirror the scene about the xy plane.
.TP
.BI -i \ count
Iterate (repeat) the following transformation (up to the next
.I \-i
option)
.I count
times.
This option is primarily to support the
.I \-a
option, which is described below.
.SS Arrays
An array is a repeated transformation that results in a repeated object.
It is specified using the
.I \-a
option, which takes the number to repeat as its argument.
The objects will step by the transformation given between
this
.I \-a
option and the next
.I \-a
or
.I \-i
option.
The first object will have zero applications of the transform.
A two-dimensional array is given by two different transformations
each preceded by an array count.
.SH EXAMPLE
To rotate ``book'' 30 degrees about the x axis then
move 20 in y, prepending the name book1:
.IP "" .2i
xform \-n book1 \-rx 30 \-t 0 20 0 book > book1
.PP
To expand all commands and see what information is actually used by RADIANCE:
.IP "" .2i
xform scene | more
.PP
To create a two-dimensional array of 20 lights, after an initial rotation
and followed by a global translation (no command expansion):
.IP "" .2i
xform \-c \-rz 90 \-a 5 \-t 2 0 0 \-a 4 \-t 0 1.5 0 \-i 1 \-t 0 0 10 light
.SH ENVIRONMENT
RAYPATH		path to search for scene files
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH BUGS
Only regular (distortion-free) transformations are allowed.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
genbox(1), gensurf(1), oconv(1), replmarks(1), rpict(1), rvu(1)
