.\" RCSid "$Id$"
.TH XIMAGE 1 10/27/98 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
ximage - RADIANCE picture display for X window system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ximage
[
.B \=geometry
][
.B "\-di display"
][
.B "\-c ncolors"
][
.B \-d
][
.B \-b
][
.B \-m
][
.B "\-g gamma"
][
.B \-f
][
.B "\-e spec
][
.BI -o spec
][
.B "\-t intvl"
][
.B \-s
]
.B "picture .."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ximage
takes one or more RADIANCE picture files
and displays them on an X server.
The
.I \-c
option specifies the number of colors to use (default fills color table).
The
.I \-d
option turns off color dithering.
The
.I \-b
option displays the image in black and white (greyscale).
The
.I \-m
option forces monochrome output.
The
.I \-g
option specifies the exponent used in gamma correction;
the default value is 2.2.
The
.I \-f
option stores a Pixmap on the server side for faster refresh.
This may not work with large images on some servers.
The
.I \-o
option specifies a sequence of information to print to the standard
output for the 't' command (see below).
The
.I \-t
option specifies a minimum interval (in milliseconds)
between successive ray outputs
in mouse tracking mode (right button pressed).
.PP
The
.I \-e
option specifies an exposure compensation in f-stops (powers of two).
Only integer stops are allowed, for efficiency.
If the special word,
.I auto
is given instead of a number of stops, then
.I ximage
performs an automatic exposure adjustment similar to
.I pcond(1),
compressing the dynamic range of the image to fit
within the dynamic range of the display.
If the special word,
.I human
is given instead, then
.I ximage
performs an exposure adjustment similar to
.I pcond
with the
.I \-s
and
.I \-c
options, which compensate for human contrast and color sensitivity
at the corresponding scene luminance levels.
This option yields and appearance of the scene on the display that
closely matches what would be experienced in the real world.
.PP
The
.I \-s
option tells
.I ximage
to display multiple pictures sequentially, rather than all at once.
If no
.I picture
is given, input is read from stdin provided either the
.I \-b
or
.I \-m
option is in effect, or the X server is capable of 24-bit color.
However, many of the commands given below will not work.
.SH COMMANDS
Once a picture is displayed, the user
may perform a number of operations.
Some of the operations make use of an area of interest, defined by pressing
the left mouse button and dragging the cursor over a section of the image.
Pressing the button and immediately releasing it defines a single point as
the area of interest.
A command is a single character.
.TP 10n
.BR q
Quit picture.
(Also Q or ^D.)\0
.TP 10
.BR <space>
Redraw the area of interest.
.TP 10
.BR ^R
Redraw the entire image.
.TP
.BR <return>
Display the radiance averaged over the area of interest.
The maximum of the three (RGB) channels is reported.
.TP
.BR l
Display the photometrically-weighted luminance value in the area of interest.
This assumes that the image was correctly computed in terms of
luminance.
.TP
.BR c
Display the color in the area of interest, as adjusted by the current
exposure setting.
.TP
.BR p
Display the x and y location of the cursor.
.TP
.BR i
Identify identical pixels by assigning a random color at the cursor position.
This is useful for displaying contours, especially when combined
with the \-b option.
.TP
.BR t
Print information about the pixel under the cursor
according to the string following the
.I \-o
command line option.
The valid characters for this option correspond roughly to the other
.I ximage
commands:
.IP
o	ray origin
.IP
d	ray direction
.IP
v	radiance value
.IP
l	luminance value
.IP
p	pixel position
.IP
The default output is "\-ood", which prints
the ray origin and direction.
This can be used as input to rtrace(1) to get additional information
about the image (ie. pipe the output of ximage into rtrace).
Pressing the middle mouse button is equivalent to typing the 't' key.
Pressing and holding the right mouse button is equivalent to
continuously pressing the 't' key.
.TP
.BR =
Adjust the exposure to the area of interest.
A crude adjustment is made immediately, and the number of stops
is printed while the colors are resampled.
After a few seconds to a minute, the final image is redisplayed.
If the area of interest is already within 1/2 stop of the ideal,
no adjustment is made.
.TP
.BR @
Same as '=' command, only the exposure is adjusted to provide
roughly the same visibility for the selected region
on screen as a viewer would experience
in the actual space.
Like the 'l' command, this adjustment assumes that the image
has been correctly computed in terms of luminance.
(See also the 'h' command, below.)
.TP
.BR a
Perform automatic exposure compensation, as if
.I ximage
were started with the
.I "\-e auto"
option.
If a rectangular area has been selected, the pixels in this region
will be emphasized in the histogram, offering this area exposure preference.
(Each pixel within the rectangle will be weighted as 21 outside pixels.)
.TP
.BR h
Perform human expsoure compensation, as if
.I ximage
were started with the
.I "\-e human"
option.
See the 'a' command above regarding pixel weighting.
.TP
.BR 0
Reset the origin to the upper left corner of the image.
This command is used to restore the original image position after
using the shift or control key with the mouse to relocate the image
within the frame (see below).
.TP
.BR f
Switch on the fast redraw option
.I (\-f),
loading the image pixmap over to the server side.
This command is useful when network delays are causing slow image
refresh, and the user didn't notice it until after
.I ximage
was started.
.TP
.BR F
Switch off the fast redraw option.
This frees up some memory on the server, as well as the color table
for other windows.
.PP
In addition to the commands listed above, the control or shift key may
be held while the cursor is dragged to reposition the image within the
window.
.SH "X RESOURCES"
radiance.gamma	the default gamma correction value
.SH ENVIRONMENT
DISPLAY_GAMMA		the default gamma correction value
.SH AUTHORS
Greg Ward
.br
Anat Grynberg (Paris)
.br
Philip Thompson (MIT)
.SH "SEE ALSO"
aedimage(1), normtiff(1), pcond(1), pfilt(1), rpict(1), rtrace(1),
rvu(1), xglaresrc(1), xshowtrace(1)
